[Amit Varma]: Benjamin Franklin once said, quote, democracy is two wolves and a lamb voting on what they
[Amit Varma]: are going to have for lunch, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: That tells you from a lamb's point of view, that democracy is not enough.
[Amit Varma]: The wolves are going to vote to eat the lamb.
[Amit Varma]: Democracy by itself is meaningless unless you have a set of rules to protect every individual.
[Amit Varma]: The rules have to state that the wolves may not eat the lamb, no matter how lofty the
[Amit Varma]: stated purpose may be.
[Amit Varma]: In modern times, we call these rules a constitution.
[Amit Varma]: The constitution is a book of rules that protects the rights of lambs by limiting the behavior
[Amit Varma]: of wolves.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: A constitution should ideally limit what a state can do to its citizens.
[Amit Varma]: But this raises a difficult question.
[Amit Varma]: What if a popular leader says that, hey, listen, I have the people of this nation with me.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, I am legitimate.
[Amit Varma]: This constitution is only legitimate as long as I say so.
[Amit Varma]: If I don't agree with some part of it, I will change it.
[Amit Varma]: What happens to the lamb then?
[Amit Varma]: Is this attitude something we should be worried about in India?
[Amit Varma]: Well, 70 years ago, this was the exact position taken by Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we live in times when everyone looks at the world through binaries.
[Amit Varma]: If you're not with us, you're against us.
[Amit Varma]: If you're not the purest of white, you're the blackest of black.
[Amit Varma]: This has especially happened since 2014, when Narendra Modi won elections.
[Amit Varma]: For members of the tribe of Modi, history ended in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing after that can be discussed and everything is Nehru's fault.
[Amit Varma]: For people in the anti-Modi tribe, history began in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: We can only talk about the wrong that has happened since then.
[Amit Varma]: Before that, India was a golden age and our leaders were saints.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is obviously a ridiculous binary and it affects how we look at history.
[Amit Varma]: Consider Nehru, for example, who for one side is a saint and for the other side, a demon.
[Amit Varma]: Nehru was a complex man.
[Amit Varma]: He was a great leader during the freedom struggle and when he became prime minister of India,
[Amit Varma]: he got some things right and he got some things wrong.
[Amit Varma]: You can ascribe some of his mistakes to the temper of the times and you can ascribe some
[Amit Varma]: of them to his own temperament.
[Amit Varma]: Nehru contained multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, our constitution contains multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people often speak of the constitution as if it is some sort of holy book, but the
[Amit Varma]: truth is it's not a book at all.
[Amit Varma]: It was a book for just over a year between 1950 and 1951, after which, as one famous
[Amit Varma]: cartoon says, it ceased to be a book and became a periodical.
[Amit Varma]: Starting with Nehru, it became common that whenever a court called an action by a prime
[Amit Varma]: minister unconstitutional, the prime minister just went and changed the constitution.
[Amit Varma]: The first amendment came in 1951 and in that, as well as through subsequent amendments like
[Amit Varma]: the third, the fourth, the seventh, the 17th, our rights were diluted as the constitution
[Amit Varma]: became less and less liberal.
[Amit Varma]: No less than the father of the constitution, B. R. Ambedkar, said in 1954, at the time
[Amit Varma]: of the fourth amendment, that the constitution had been so degraded that he wanted to burn
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar, of course, was in the government at the time of the first amendment, which
[Amit Varma]: is such a fascinating period in India's history.
[Amit Varma]: The government in power at the time, led by Nehru, realized that the constitution came
[Amit Varma]: in the way of much of what they wanted to accomplish.
[Amit Varma]: So they set about to amend it.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a scholar, Tripur Dhaman Singh, who has written an excellent book called
[Amit Varma]: 16 Stormy Days, 16 Stormy Days lays out the details of the complex political landscape
[Amit Varma]: of those times, showing how so many of the leaders involved, including Nehru, were creatures
[Amit Varma]: of circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: You could even say they were responding to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: I wish every Indian, especially every Indian on Twitter would read this book, because it
[Amit Varma]: would give so much nuance to their understanding of Indian politics.
[Amit Varma]: One of my big learnings from the book was about our free speech laws.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a free speech absolutist, and I've always railed in column after column after column
[Amit Varma]: against section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, which is a sedition law, as well as 153A and
[Amit Varma]: 295A.
[Amit Varma]: These are all colonial era laws, they should not exist today, right?
[Amit Varma]: Well, as Tripur Dhaman points out, these laws were deemed to be unconstitutional in 1950.
[Amit Varma]: But the caveats to free speech added in the first amendment made them constitutional again.
[Amit Varma]: That's some of the TIL moments in this superb book and in this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to our conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support, and contributing an amount
[Amit Varma]: of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Keep this thing going, sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Tripur Dhaman, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me, Amit.
[Guest]: It's an absolute pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Tripur Dhaman, before we get started talking about your fascinating book, which I enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: so much, and I wish many more people read and internalized, I'd love to know about your
[Amit Varma]: personal background.
[Amit Varma]: Like, how did you become a historian?
[Amit Varma]: What were your sort of intellectual influences, the historians that you looked up to?
[Amit Varma]: What drew you to history as a discipline?
[Guest]: So I actually have always had a kind of fascination for history and for politics.
[Guest]: And when I was going to university, I kind of really thought hard about, you know, which
[Guest]: line to take.
[Guest]: And I ended up going with politics.
[Guest]: But I found that I, while I did really enjoy the kind of, I studied politics and international
[Guest]: relations for my undergraduate degree, and I really enjoyed it.
[Guest]: But I always felt that there was, that, I mean, history kind of always had a lot more
[Guest]: fascination.
[Guest]: I mean, it kind of interested me in a way that sort of political theory and international
[Guest]: relations theory didn't.
[Guest]: So then I ended up doing a master's in South Asian studies at Cambridge, where I was taken
[Guest]: on as a student by Christopher Bailey.
[Guest]: And that was a very, that was my first real introduction to historical research.
[Guest]: It was kind of eye opening in many ways.
[Guest]: It really kind of forced me to broaden the way I think, the way I kind of work.
[Guest]: And I think Bailey exercised like quite a great influence on me.
[Guest]: And so that's how I ended up, and then because I did quite well, he was like, well, you should
[Guest]: think about a PhD.
[Guest]: And I, you know, really liked him, I really liked what I did.
[Guest]: And that was kind of how I, how I went into it.
[Guest]: And progressively, the more, I think the more I read and the more I came across, the more
[Guest]: I wanted to read and, you know, the more I wanted to get into the thick of sort of archival
[Guest]: action and research.
[Guest]: And I think one thing really led to another and you, in the end, you know, that I've kind
[Guest]: of ended up doing this as an academic.
[Guest]: So, so far, so good, I'd say.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, while you got down to it, and you've written one book before this, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as you kind of approached that project, were you sort of just going with the flow
[Amit Varma]: and just picking up what interested you at the time?
[Amit Varma]: Or were there sort of themes that had always fascinated you, which you sort of took the
[Amit Varma]: opportunity to explore?
[Guest]: So I actually started out with working on 18th and 19th century India.
[Guest]: Because that's what I had, you know, 10 years ago, that's what I thought was one of the
[Guest]: most fascinating periods of Indian history.
[Guest]: It still is.
[Guest]: But it was, it was a kind of period of like, real flux.
[Guest]: And it's, it's the kind of period, say, someone like William Dalrymple writes about.
[Guest]: And some of the things that were kind of happening were just mind boggling.
[Guest]: You had, you know, adventurers from Luxembourg setting up, you know, little kingdoms, you
[Guest]: had the kind of titular Mughal Empire still kind of soldiering on.
[Guest]: There was so much going on.
[Guest]: And making sense of how things happened was constantly a sort of challenge.
[Guest]: Because I had never, when I did start with history, I'd never studied history academically
[Guest]: before, not for my undergraduate, not even for my, you know, final two years of school.
[Guest]: So I found the whole process of doing research really fascinating.
[Guest]: And I think the 19th century was kind of a very, very interesting period to start with,
[Guest]: because it was one I was working with, I mean, possibly one of the greatest historians of
[Guest]: his generation.
[Guest]: And secondly, it was a kind of project which really needed you to, you know, dig into,
[Guest]: you know, quite old archival material.
[Guest]: It would take, you know, you would sit through 200-year-old documents.
[Guest]: And I found the whole process really fascinating.
[Guest]: And that period, because it's even now such a contested sort of time in Indian history,
[Guest]: we, it's, I mean, very politically charged to talk about, as you can see now, to talk
[Guest]: about, for example, the period which was the, you know, the end of the Mughal Empire and
[Guest]: the kind of rise of the British.
[Guest]: And so I found, when I started out, I think I had a very, didn't have a very precise idea
[Guest]: of where the project would go.
[Guest]: But as things developed, there were kind of certain themes which have really kind of stuck
[Guest]: with me since.
[Guest]: And those include things like the idea of the law, the concept of sovereignty, the,
[Guest]: you know, how these sort of kind of small adventurers or small, like, kingdoms set up
[Guest]: political entities within the sort of framework of the, you know, of the empire, really.
[Guest]: And so I think those themes have kind of stuck with me.
[Guest]: And some of them are kind of even reflected in this work on the Constitution, because
[Guest]: the idea of law and ideology is kind of laced through this work as well.
[Amit Varma]: So a sort of a couple of questions.
[Amit Varma]: One question is that, you know, most of us, when most of us non-historians, when we think
[Amit Varma]: of the telling of history, we think of it as, okay, you research a lot of facts, and
[Amit Varma]: you build a story around it, and you tell a story.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously, for a historian, you are sort of doing many different things.
[Amit Varma]: What is the process of doing history per se, as a historian, really like, you have to sort
[Amit Varma]: of set aside preconceptions and that you might have or that existing narratives about it.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the hindsight bias, where we already know what happened, but, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in the moment, it's never apparent what's going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of adjustments you have to make when you actually sit down to the
[Amit Varma]: practice of studying and writing history, especially as you say, since you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: took it up while, you know, in your post graduation, and you hadn't really studied the formal art
[Amit Varma]: of doing history before that?
[Guest]: I mean, I think it's quite hard to start from a kind of blank canvas.
[Guest]: We all have certain biases, certain, I wouldn't say preconceptions, but certain ideas about
[Guest]: the world, about the past.
[Guest]: And I don't think you can start from a blank canvas, but you have to be willing to let
[Guest]: your own ideas be challenged, and be willing to kind of take them apart and put them back
[Guest]: together again.
[Guest]: And I think that's something that is really important, and that's something that I've
[Guest]: really learned through the last several years.
[Guest]: And I think one of the problems that I first had when I started my, I'd say my work as
[Guest]: a historian was my unfamiliarity with kind of the historiographical and methodological
[Guest]: tools that we use, because we do more than just tell a story.
[Guest]: And facts are always, I mean, facts are never really facts in the way that people often
[Guest]: understand them.
[Guest]: They have to be contextualized.
[Guest]: You have to interrogate your sources, because just because someone's saying something 200
[Guest]: years ago doesn't, you know, their word doesn't necessarily make it true.
[Guest]: So you have to be able to read them against the grain.
[Guest]: And you have to also think of how the world was at the period that you were writing about.
[Guest]: And that's where the kind of, a lot of the kind of theory that we forced to really, not
[Guest]: necessarily forced to, but you know, you have to come to terms with it, is sort of different
[Guest]: ways of conceptualizing the past.
[Guest]: And you have to be willing to, and that's, I feel that's where like most of the grunt
[Guest]: work really lies.
[Guest]: It's the sort of collection of facts and retelling of facts is the easy part, contextualizing
[Guest]: it and interpreting it in sort of in the light of, you know, the broader framework that you're
[Guest]: using to assess it or other ideas about the period that you're talking about.
[Guest]: That's where the real work lies, because you have to also take on board ideas that other
[Guest]: people have, which may be diametrically opposite to yours, and we can't simply ignore them
[Guest]: and say, well, I'm going to say this, which I guess you can in, you know, if you're writing
[Guest]: as an amateur or if you're, but for something to stand the kind of, stand the scrutiny of
[Guest]: your peers, it has to be willing to take on board a lot of ideas that you don't necessarily
[Guest]: agree with.
[Guest]: And I think that's one of the major, major differences between having a kind of, not
[Guest]: necessarily academic, but I'd say a professional historian versus a kind of raconteur of stories.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you mentioned that you spoke about the framework through which you approach
[Amit Varma]: history and you look at history.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, as you said, none of us are blank slates going into looking at whatever
[Amit Varma]: we're looking at.
[Amit Varma]: So how much of this sort of framework was influenced by your studies of political science?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you mentioned about how, you know, in your earlier book, you were interested
[Amit Varma]: in ideas of sovereignty and law and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, even in this book, there's a very, you know, a crisp, cogent, very lucid
[Amit Varma]: understanding of, you know, constitutionalism and liberalism and sort of the central fault
[Amit Varma]: lines of that period, which is, of course, the political imperatives of the Congress
[Amit Varma]: party and Nehru versus a constitutional project that they had embarked upon, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a very clear line and yet a frame that I haven't seen many other people who write
[Amit Varma]: about that period use at all.
[Amit Varma]: So how important was all of that political science training in defining sort of the way
[Amit Varma]: you look at history?
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that that's something that all historians sort of carry with them, that
[Amit Varma]: the frame also matters?
[Amit Varma]: It's not just, you know, how scrupulously you can, you know, get all the facts and tell
[Amit Varma]: the story, but even the way you interpret it?
[Guest]: I mean, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: It does, the kind of the framework that you use and the kind of narrative that you build
[Guest]: are hugely important parts of the story you tell.
[Guest]: And like my last book, because I felt this was, I mean, it's the kind of story that deserves
[Guest]: to be really widely read.
[Guest]: It's something that people are very unfamiliar with and something that affects everybody's
[Guest]: life quite intimately in ways that, you know, we don't often acknowledge.
[Guest]: And for that reason, I tried to keep things as lucid, as crisp, as sort of easy to access
[Guest]: as I could.
[Guest]: And that's because I was writing for an audience that may not necessarily be invested in history
[Guest]: in the same way as I would have written it if I was writing, you know, for Oxford University
[Guest]: Press.
[Guest]: And I think that that kind of makes a huge difference.
[Guest]: As far as my sort of background in politics goes, it was, I think it gave me a good, it's
[Guest]: given me a good kind of basic idea of the kind of ideological elements that come into
[Guest]: being as well as the, I'd say, a sort of historical background of many of these ideas such as
[Guest]: liberalism or constitutionalism.
[Guest]: And I think looking back, it's probably been quite helpful because I can perhaps talk about
[Guest]: both sides of the story with what I hope is like relative clarity.
[Guest]: And I hope that that's something that comes across in the book as well.
[Amit Varma]: I was struck by the clarity of the writing and the fact that it's a book that can be
[Amit Varma]: read by the lay reader and not someone who only reads history for that matter.
[Amit Varma]: So were there any models in terms of historical writing that you looked at for this kind of
[Guest]: book?
[Guest]: There isn't really a specific model.
[Guest]: I think it's just something that's come to me through reading a lot of historians.
[Guest]: And there are some books which really are very, very interesting, but then they're also
[Guest]: written in a kind of way that makes them quite dull to read.
[Guest]: And I'd read them through because of the level of interest that I have in it, but someone
[Guest]: else might not.
[Guest]: And I think my thought always was that anyone with a slight interest in history or politics
[Guest]: should be able to pick this book up and be able to read it, no matter whether they're
[Guest]: like 16 or whether they're 60, and be able to make sense of it because it's not the easiest
[Guest]: subject to talk about.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, it's hugely important.
[Guest]: And I think that's part and parcel of a historian's craft is to, especially if you're writing
[Guest]: about something that has such a huge bearing on the contemporary world, to make your material
[Guest]: accessible to a wide audience.
[Guest]: And I think one of the ideas, and this is like what I once watched, well, I watched
[Guest]: the film a long time ago, but I once read a review of the old Hindi film Dhundh, which
[Guest]: is from the 1970s.
[Guest]: And the reviewer wrote, one of the reasons that he really loved the film was that he
[Guest]: was like, yeah, the action moves at the pace of a gunshot.
[Guest]: And that's something that's always struck with me, is you shouldn't make things more
[Guest]: complicated than they are, and you shouldn't unnecessarily pad out what you want to say.
[Guest]: So if it can be said in a kind of way that keeps the narrative flowing quickly, and it
[Guest]: can be said in a way that is, you know, clear and accessible, then that's what you should
[Amit Varma]: go for.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that struck me was, like you said, it's a hugely important book, and we'll
[Amit Varma]: come to that when we discuss the book, but it also struck me that the writing of it at
[Amit Varma]: this time is also surely something that you must have thought twice about, because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, doing history means you're embracing nuance, you know, as you have done in this
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: But modern politics, especially in the last few years, is really the stripping away of
[Amit Varma]: nuance and history has almost been weaponized.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we've created all these stark binaries through which we look at history,
[Amit Varma]: where for one side, you know, Nehru is all black, and for the other side, Nehru is all
[Amit Varma]: white, and there's no other way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, you know, figures like Shama Prasad Mukherjee, and all of those, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are many people today who purport on the one hand to support the Congress, but
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, they treat the Constitution almost as a holy book.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, sometimes they will say in response to an argument, but that is unconstitutional
[Amit Varma]: as if that is automatically the end of the argument, and you don't need to say anything
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: While the reality, of course, is that, you know, as that old cartoon goes, the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: is less of a book and more of a periodical, you know, Nehru, in fact, was in the habit
[Amit Varma]: of every time something he did was deemed unconstitutional.
[Amit Varma]: He simply amended the Constitution, not just in the First Amendment, as you write about,
[Amit Varma]: but the fourth, the seventh, the 17th, which went to Parliament just before he died, he
[Amit Varma]: sort of did this repeatedly.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you would have known when you began this book that this was sort of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, not fitting in these polarized times, it would just be, you know, it would not be
[Amit Varma]: an easy project to do.
[Amit Varma]: What did you think about it in that sense?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did that increase the urgency of doing the book that, you know, something needs to
[Amit Varma]: counter the prevailing narratives, or is it something that made you think twice?
[Guest]: No, I think actually, that's one of the reasons why I really wrote it was that it sort of
[Guest]: inverts so many of these binaries that we've come to accept as a given.
[Guest]: And it really, it's, if somebody approaches it with an open mind, it kind of really scrambles
[Guest]: the sort of easy, the kind of easy dichotomies that we draw.
[Guest]: And it is, yeah, it's a story that needs nuance, but equally, it's something that really sort
[Guest]: of has the potential to throw things a bit off kilter.
[Guest]: And yes, I knew when I wrote it that it, when I was writing it, that it has the potential
[Guest]: to be used as a kind of political tool in the current climate.
[Guest]: But of course, I finished writing it before the kind of, you know, the protests over the
[Guest]: CAA, etc. happened, which really brought the Constitution suddenly back into public debate.
[Guest]: So it wasn't expressly written with the intent of being a kind of intervention in the debates
[Guest]: of today.
[Guest]: But I was well aware that it is something that impinges quite heavily on today's world.
[Guest]: And the thing is, nobody comes out of it looking like you would expect.
[Guest]: So it has potential to be, I guess, used as a kind of intellectual weapon.
[Guest]: But I think that potential is open ended, so it can be used by either side to criticize
[Guest]: the other.
[Guest]: And I think that is something that I was aware of.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's what makes it interesting.
[Amit Varma]: It's a fascinating book.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, for the human aspects of it, you know, you've kind of made all of
[Amit Varma]: these people, Nehru, Patel, Mukherjee, and so on, so much more three dimensional than
[Amit Varma]: we otherwise knew of them.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, just as you bring the lens of politics and political science, rather, in
[Amit Varma]: your telling of history, I kind of, you know, invoke economics in my podcast a lot.
[Amit Varma]: So as I was reading this book, it kind of, you know, confirmed my sense of how incentives
[Amit Varma]: shape actions and shape behavior.
[Amit Varma]: And I had a question for you on that, because one of the interesting things that you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, and it's like a strand through the book, and it's endlessly fascinating is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and we'll discuss the book in detail, the context and everything that happened.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the strands that really struck me was that at the time of the first amendment
[Amit Varma]: being carried out, you know, Raja ji and Ambedkar were both part of the establishment.
[Amit Varma]: And they played a part in actually getting many of these amendments through Raja ji,
[Amit Varma]: the sort of the anti free speech parts of it, and Ambedkar, all the rest of it.
[Amit Varma]: And they were in government, and they were all for it.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, after they are in government, as you pointed out, Ambedkar actually represented
[Amit Varma]: the zamindars against the very act that he had helped bring about.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, Raja ji goes on to form the Swatantra party and become a beacon of liberalism,
[Amit Varma]: while they're acting while in government is contrary to that.
[Amit Varma]: And it sort of struck me about that old truism of Lord Acton that power corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that their behavior is actually entirely natural.
[Amit Varma]: If you consider the incentives that if you're part of the executive, that arm of government,
[Amit Varma]: you will obviously be drawn to actions that strengthen the part of the government which
[Amit Varma]: you are part of.
[Amit Varma]: You might not think of it like that.
[Amit Varma]: But that's pretty much what you'll be drawn to.
[Amit Varma]: So to me, it's not so much of a contradiction that when they were part of the government,
[Amit Varma]: they behaved in a way that would stand in their arm of government.
[Amit Varma]: And then once they are out of it, they can go back to talking about principles and you
[Amit Varma]: know, similarly, Nehru much earlier before he became Prime Minister warned of his own
[Amit Varma]: dictatorial tendencies.
[Amit Varma]: And yet when he became a Prime Minister, you know, he ignored the warnings of his past
[Amit Varma]: self, in a way, now, you've obviously, you know, studied that period and these people
[Amit Varma]: much more than me.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of this that to what extent can they be and unconsciously, of course,
[Amit Varma]: not, you know, justifying it in these terms, but to what extent are they actually responding
[Amit Varma]: to incentives and can be read as creatures of their circumstances?
[Guest]: They were definitely creatures of their circumstances.
[Guest]: And that kind of comes through in the sort of reasons that they invoke.
[Guest]: And there is, I never quite point out, I mean, I never hint that they were, for example,
[Guest]: somehow inherently evil, or like somehow inherently, you know, their moral compass was corrupted.
[Guest]: They were obviously responding to the situation as they saw it.
[Guest]: But the incentives part, how I put it is that they have, I think, part of it is to do with
[Guest]: the fact that they were quite, as you know, Patel once, I pointed out at some point in
[Guest]: the book where Patel tells Nehru, you know, this is the result of idealistic exuberance.
[Guest]: And I think the idealism had a major role to play somewhere, because they just passed
[Guest]: the Constitution, they had, you know, all of these grand ambitions, and they either
[Guest]: thought of themselves as kind of above these kind of despotic tendencies, or as people
[Guest]: who would, you know, wield them with the idea of utmost benevolence.
[Guest]: And that is, I feel, one major aspect of why they did what they did.
[Guest]: Secondly, there was, of course, the incentive, and the incentive was driven also by the fact
[Guest]: that they were the only organized political force that there was.
[Guest]: So there was no real incentive to take on board the views of the opposition or the warnings,
[Guest]: you know, issued by, you know, figures like Mukherjee or Kripalani or people like that,
[Guest]: because there was the idea that they would somehow, at some point, have to face the same
[Guest]: tools that they were crafting was just so far-fetched.
[Guest]: And I think that probably made it easy enough to contemplate these measures that I think
[Guest]: they probably would not have if there had been any real political organization with
[Guest]: the standing to challenge the Congress.
[Guest]: And I think that was one major incentive.
[Guest]: I think the other, again, and this is, I think, quite common to most democracies, is that
[Guest]: the incentive, if possible, to take shortcuts to gain political benefit is always there.
[Guest]: And a lot of these people quite clearly succumb to it.
[Amit Varma]: There's a fascinating passage from your book, which I'll read out, which is, in fact, about
[Amit Varma]: the Congress, where you write, from its earliest days, the Congress Party had claimed to speak
[Amit Varma]: for the entirety of the nation and to represent all Indians.
[Amit Varma]: The party was as committed to denying every other group or party a seat at the political
[Amit Varma]: high table as it was to gaining control of the levers of power.
[Amit Varma]: As a self-declared representative of the nation, the Congress laid claim to possession of the
[Amit Varma]: colonial state and all its territory.
[Amit Varma]: With the advent of democracy and the inauguration of the Constitution, this position, incompatible
[Amit Varma]: with any idea of constitutional democracy, was strained to breaking point when its collectivist
[Amit Varma]: mirrorings and its intolerance of opposing ideologies clashed with an expansively liberal
[Amit Varma]: Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: The Congress Party, instead of defending the normative foundations of democracy and the
[Amit Varma]: fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution, instinctively turned on its own creation."
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of, you know, in your book, what you've done an excellent job is of laying
[Amit Varma]: out the context of that immediate period between, you know, 26 Jan 1950, when the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: comes into being and, and then the First Amendment 14 months later, but give me a broader sense
[Amit Varma]: of the context of these times as we, you know, come into this that what is a Congress's approach
[Amit Varma]: and my sense in us, in a way was that, you know, people like Nehru and Patel and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: when they spoke so highly of the fundamental rights and all of that earlier, were in a
[Amit Varma]: sense doing what we would today call virtue signaling.
[Amit Varma]: But when they realized that the, that it would impact their ability to do all the things
[Amit Varma]: that they wanted to do, which the Congress was predicated upon, because the whole Congress's
[Amit Varma]: platform was social change and a certain kind of progressive progressivism, which then those
[Amit Varma]: fundamental rights got in the way of.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, how was all of that sort of playing out?
[Amit Varma]: Was this clash between fundamental rights and politics kind of inevitable in the way
[Amit Varma]: the last few years shaped up or, you know, was it sort of contingent upon the circumstance
[Amit Varma]: of Nehru being the person who happened to be the Prime Minister?
[Guest]: What is your sense of that?
[Guest]: A quick word about that quote, though, so that's a whole school of Indian history would
[Guest]: kind of subscribe to that view.
[Guest]: And I think I referenced that to Sunil Khillani.
[Guest]: But of course, there are also others like Barry Anderson, etc.
[Guest]: And it's so partition, for example, was something that was framed in Congress circles as a price
[Guest]: that they had to pay to have a centralized state under their own control.
[Guest]: And that kind of reflects, again, I said, I think it kind of testifies to the idea that
[Guest]: I think that the Congress was quite committed to a centralized state under its own control.
[Guest]: And I mean, one of the sticking points throughout the 1930s and 1940s in Indian politics is
[Guest]: the Congress demand to be taken for, you know, the Congress demand for the British to consider
[Guest]: it the sole representative of the nation.
[Guest]: And ultimately, that's what becomes a stumbling block.
[Guest]: It becomes a stumbling block in the 40s with the rise of the Muslim League because it becomes
[Guest]: a position that's completely untenable.
[Guest]: You know, once the Muslim League wins the majority of Muslim seats, it becomes quite
[Guest]: apparent that the Congress doesn't represent the entirety of the nation because they lose
[Guest]: quite badly in the Muslim seats.
[Guest]: And that kind of idea still, but the idea doesn't really die because the thing is, it's
[Guest]: thought that that problem has been overcome, or at least sidelined with partition.
[Guest]: And so once the exercise to, you know, write the Constitution, etc., begins, you have token
[Guest]: representation of other groups.
[Guest]: And I think it's done with the idea that, you know, you give the impression that it's
[Guest]: a very representative assembly.
[Guest]: But as people never tire of pointing out, even during the Constituent Assembly debates,
[Guest]: it's essentially a one-party body in a one-party country.
[Guest]: There is no other party.
[Guest]: And the party that dominates the Constituent Assembly also holds the levers of executive
[Guest]: power.
[Guest]: And once the Constitution comes into force, and everyone knows that an election is going
[Guest]: to be held, it also creates a kind of incentive for people who are already, you know, in the
[Guest]: Constituent Assembly, and to kind of toe the orders that come from Nehru and Patel, because
[Guest]: a lot of them want to be re-elected.
[Guest]: And the only way that they will get their nominations is if they keep the party bosses
[Guest]: content.
[Guest]: And so that's, again, contemporary sort of articles in the press speak about this openly.
[Guest]: And then, of course, you also have the kind of decline of Sardar Patel, because he's,
[Guest]: by the mid-1950s, he's actually bedridden for most of the time.
[Guest]: And he passes away in 1950.
[Guest]: And by then, Nehru is already more or less ascendant.
[Guest]: I talk about it at some point in the book with the Nasik Congress, where in Patel's
[Guest]: absence, you know, Nehru kind of has his own way.
[Guest]: And eventually, after Patel's death, really, you have a system where Nehru is such a political
[Guest]: colossus that there is no one really in the cabinet who can, you know, stand up to him
[Guest]: or put forward a strong alternative position.
[Guest]: Nehru's biographer Sarvapalli Gopal, who is actually very sympathetic to Nehru, you know,
[Guest]: calls it a sort of collection of mouldering mediocrities.
[Guest]: And so the context is that the political capital that Nehru brings to bear, much like today,
[Guest]: ensures that he is capable of getting his own way.
[Guest]: And I think I make a reasonably strong case in the book for arguing that much of it is
[Guest]: driven by Nehru's own personal investment in these policies, rather than any sort of
[Guest]: great pressure from the states, because he resists the pressure for things that he kind
[Guest]: of feels very strongly about.
[Guest]: And on the other side, equally, you have figures like S. P. Mukherjee or H. N. Kundzor, or
[Guest]: even Kriplani, who then resigns from the Congress.
[Guest]: They're very articulate, they're very good at, you know, the sort of ins and outs of
[Guest]: parliamentary debate.
[Guest]: But unfortunately, no one has the kind of political organisation or the public standing
[Guest]: to mount a significant challenge.
[Guest]: And I think that's a kind of interesting thing to note, because it has so many contemporary
[Guest]: echoes the way like we sort of conceptualise today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, those contemporary echoes are, you know, sort of echoed as it were, throughout
[Amit Varma]: my reading of the book, when, you know, because in our modern times as well, we seem to have
[Amit Varma]: a single party which is utterly dominant, as it was then, we have a larger than life
[Amit Varma]: figure in charge of that party.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you just repeated a quote about the quality of Nehru's cabinet and a similar
[Amit Varma]: thing could possibly be said about this one about, you know, how eminences like Arun Shourie
[Amit Varma]: for example, were just sidelined in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got a much weaker cabinet than you could have.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you have worries about the constitution about how it's been degraded and sort of made
[Amit Varma]: meaningless and how that particular arm of the state is being strengthened as compared
[Amit Varma]: to the others.
[Amit Varma]: Though those, you know, one could argue today that hey, the constitutions was already degraded
[Amit Varma]: that you talk of the, you know, I'm struck by something Kapil Komeredi said on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: where somebody was complaining about the murder of democracy when these recent farm bills
[Amit Varma]: were passed the way they were, which was a murder of democracy.
[Amit Varma]: But as Kapil pointed out, it was not just murder, it was also mimicry, because it's
[Amit Varma]: all happened before.
[Amit Varma]: And your book is very instructive in that regard.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I used to often joke about how, you know, despite blaming Nehru for everything,
[Amit Varma]: Modi is actually, you know, a mimic in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and what I mainly meant was the whole central planning top down approach of the
[Amit Varma]: economy.
[Amit Varma]: But even with the approach towards power, the approach to the constitution, it's extremely
[Amit Varma]: similar.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what Nehru's imperatives and his incentives at the time
[Amit Varma]: were because he came in like 1950 is when the constitution is there, he is aware that
[Amit Varma]: he is part of a government which hasn't yet got a popular mandate.
[Amit Varma]: It's a transitionary government in that sense, he needs a popular mandate.
[Amit Varma]: Part of that mandate rests on fulfilling the promises he has made.
[Amit Varma]: Those promises include the zamindari reforms and, you know, reservations and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth, the whole social, progressive element of it.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly he finds that this constitution is in the way, you know, what the hell is
[Amit Varma]: going on?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about sort of, you know, what are his imperatives and how is he responding
[Guest]: to them?
[Guest]: I think there are several actually.
[Guest]: So one of course is the fact that Nehru is, especially with zamindari abolition, that's
[Guest]: a policy that Nehru is personally invested in and personally identified with.
[Guest]: So the Congress Party runs a tremendous sort of public contact program really for zamindari
[Guest]: abolition.
[Guest]: I think in UP alone there were like 35,000 public meetings.
[Guest]: Probably Bihar had a similar number.
[Guest]: And so there's a lot of political capital that's being invested in this and, you know,
[Guest]: from the top to the bottom, from, you know, small-time leaders like district presidents
[Guest]: to more senior figures such as, well, Nehru himself, but also figures like Charan Singh
[Guest]: and C.B. Gupta, et cetera, who are very, very both vocal and kind of committed to a particular
[Guest]: form of zamindari abolition and land reform.
[Guest]: And of course, the Congress having acquired the levers of power is also a bit, I think
[Guest]: the easiest way to describe it would be suffering from a slight hangover of the Raj because
[Guest]: it's hard to convince the public that having gotten rid of one set of rulers, the other
[Guest]: set of rulers do not have similar powers or are constrained by notions of constitutionalism
[Guest]: or legality.
[Guest]: So when the kind of first judgment, which is the staying of the Bihar Act, happens,
[Guest]: it comes as a huge shock, not only because it kind of takes a sort of sledgehammer to
[Guest]: their political capital because it shows everyone that their word is not infallible, but also
[Guest]: because it's something that has been discussed over and over again within the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly.
[Guest]: And it was something, the right to property is something that had been debated extensively
[Guest]: in past as a form of compromise between those who were kind of votaries of a strong right
[Guest]: to private property and those who felt that it would come in the way of zamindari and
[Guest]: land reform.
[Guest]: So this was something that had not been really considered possible.
[Guest]: Zamindari abolition had been considered a done deal and plenty of Congress figures are
[Guest]: on record saying this is going to happen regardless of anything else, such as constitution or
[Guest]: no constitution, this zamindari abolition will come into place.
[Guest]: So once they realize that it can't, it kind of leads to a sort of real shockwave within
[Guest]: the Congress party and many suspect that with the money and the sort of local power that
[Guest]: many of the zamindars have and can bring to bear, that the forthcoming election is something
[Guest]: to be really thought about because from the other side, and there are zamindari parties
[Guest]: which are in the fray and many of them are quite confident about being able to take on
[Guest]: the Congress.
[Guest]: So that's another thing that Nehru is acutely conscious of, that going back to the people
[Guest]: without fulfilling what he has personally promised would amount to a kind of betrayal.
[Guest]: And he says this in several letters to his chief ministers and to his colleagues that
[Guest]: it's something that he doesn't want to countenance.
[Guest]: Equally it's also something that state chief ministers do not want to countenance and Bihar
[Guest]: definitely doesn't want to countenance that and they become like the first sort of people
[Guest]: to demand a constitutional amendment to pass their law.
[Guest]: There's of course a kind of longer story connected to that law, which is that Bihar law is a
[Guest]: the only one that is found to be unconstitutional, unlike similar laws in UP and later in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: The Bihar law is basically held to be unconstitutional on a technicality, not because it violates
[Guest]: the right to property but because it violates the right to equality.
[Guest]: And so no one honestly believes that zamindari abolition is under such serious threat that
[Unknown]: a constitutional amendment is needed.
[Guest]: I mean no lesser person than the president of the republic, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, writes
[Guest]: to Nehru to tell him that no such eventuality seems to have arisen.
[Guest]: But I think it's again just the temptation to take a shortcut, to have your own way because
[Guest]: it's politically expedient.
[Guest]: It sort of trumps, I feel it trumps the commitment to the kind of ideals that they publicly professed.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And this was, of course, as you point out in your book, there are three prominent pain
[Amit Varma]: points in which the constitution got in the way of what Nehru's government wanted to do
[Amit Varma]: and this was one of them.
[Amit Varma]: Just to sort of get into the weeds and summarize briefly and you can tell me if I'm summarizing
[Amit Varma]: it correctly.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it was of course challenged on the grounds of both the right to property and
[Amit Varma]: the right to equality but the high court when striking it down in Bihar invoked the right
[Amit Varma]: to equality per se because, you know, they were giving unequal compensation to the zamindars
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that the small zamindars were getting up to 20 times their annual revenues
[Amit Varma]: while others were getting eight times and some of the big biggest ones were getting
[Amit Varma]: three times or something like that and you know which they felt infringed the right to
[Amit Varma]: equality.
[Amit Varma]: Is that correct?
[Amit Varma]: These are the grounds.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You're right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you've quoted a bunch of letters that Nehru has written, you know, on October
[Amit Varma]: 18, 1950, he wrote to Shri Krishna Sinha, who was a CM of Bihar, when Nehru says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: I am as concerned as you are with these squibblings of lawyers coming in the way of our social
[Amit Varma]: progress.
[Amit Varma]: I entirely agree with you that we shall have to consider seriously an amendment of the
[Amit Varma]: constitution.
[Amit Varma]: I am consulting the law ministry in regard to it.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then again, you quote him in a letter to all his CMs on December 18th, where he
[Amit Varma]: says, quote, recent judgments of some high courts have made us think about our constitution.
[Amit Varma]: Is it adequate in its present form to meet the situation we have to face?
[Amit Varma]: We must accept fully the judgment of our superior courts, but if they find that there is a lacuna
[Amit Varma]: in the constitution, then we shall have to remedy that.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: It sort of reminds me of, I think the quip, I forget if it's by Brecht or whoever, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, if the people don't like the government, then the government shall have to elect the
[Amit Varma]: new people or something of that sort, where Nehru's perspective is, does the constitution
[Amit Varma]: fit what we want to do rather than the other way around?
[Amit Varma]: And like you pointed out, you know, everyone was saying that nowhere have the courts actually
[Amit Varma]: said that zamindari reforms are an issue or land redistribution is an issue.
[Amit Varma]: It's very easy to be within the constitution and just revert the law a little bit to take
[Amit Varma]: care of these, but Nehru doesn't care to do that.
[Amit Varma]: So this is one of the fault lines.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the sort of the other two fault lines and, you know, the key cases in sort
[Guest]: of those regards.
[Guest]: So the other two fault lines, one, of course, is over reservations, community-based reservations.
[Guest]: And the other, which is the fault line, which the book begins with is over, and I think
[Guest]: something that's possibly the most relevant to the contemporary period is the question
[Guest]: of the right to freedom of speech, because we start with, at least I start the book with
[Guest]: this, the case of the communist detainees in Salem who, I mean, there's a scuffle in
[Guest]: Salem prison, and then finally the sort of enraged policemen lock these prisoners into
[Guest]: a hall and then open fire at them at point blank range.
[Guest]: And I think some 200 end up getting shot.
[Guest]: And there are, I don't remember off the back of my head, but if I can.
[Amit Varma]: I think you've pointed out how it kind of all begins where these detainees in Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: they realize after, you know, 26 Jan, the constitution comes into place and these guys
[Amit Varma]: realize that, according to article 22, there cannot be indefinite detention.
[Guest]: Indefinite detention without access to an advisory board.
[Guest]: And no such advisory boards existed.
[Guest]: So obviously the Bombay High Court doesn't buy the government's contention that the constitution
[Guest]: doesn't have retrospective effect or that law predates the constitution.
[Guest]: And they're let loose.
[Guest]: And of course, that's the kind of one of the first cases that brings, you know, fundamental
[Guest]: rights into play.
[Guest]: But then there's a kind of bigger question, which comes up after the shootings of the
[Guest]: detainees in Salem in cold blood, because there is a kind of, there's a left-leaning
[Guest]: magazine called Crossroads run by the young Romesh Thapar, who is coincidentally the brother
[Guest]: of the famous historian Romila Thapar.
[Guest]: But so Romesh Thapar's magazine, you know, eviscerates Nehru and the Congress and it
[Guest]: ends up getting banned in the Madras province.
[Guest]: And Thapar, of course, is not one to take it lying down.
[Guest]: He launches a collection, his readers sort of contribute to the effort and eventually
[Guest]: a petition is filed in the Supreme Court, arguing that the ban is unconstitutional.
[Guest]: And this is, it's mirrored on the other side in Delhi, where a precensorship order is served
[Guest]: against the organizer, which is the weekly news magazine of the RSS.
[Guest]: And essentially the reason the government is upset with them is that they have been
[Guest]: criticizing the Nehru government's policies towards Pakistan in the context of what's
[Guest]: been happening in Bengal.
[Guest]: Bengal had been seeing a lot of communal violence, triggered mainly by a sort of state-sponsored,
[Guest]: I mean, I wouldn't necessarily call it a kind of genocide, but sort of state-sponsored communal
[Guest]: attrition really in East Pakistan, which had led to a lot of refugees crossing over and
[Guest]: obviously retaliatory violence in West Bengal.
[Guest]: So Nehru had been trying to essentially work out a kind of agreement with Liaqat Ali Khan
[Guest]: on how they would stem the tide of the refugees.
[Guest]: And Nehru's peace overtures to Pakistan were heavily criticized in Bengal.
[Guest]: They were very unpopular and, I mean, as expected, they were also very unpopular with the Hindu
[Guest]: right, with the RSS.
[Guest]: And so the RSS news magazine was criticizing him heavily.
[Guest]: Many right-leaning public figures such as Mukherjee and, you know, someone like the
[Guest]: Hindu Mahasabha leader, Mahant Digvijayanath, were kind of clamoring for some sort of stern
[Guest]: action against Pakistan.
[Guest]: And this kind of demand for stern action saw wide echo everywhere, even within the Congress
[Guest]: Party.
[Guest]: There are letters from Nehru who suspects that this kind of viewpoint is being encouraged
[Guest]: by Patel.
[Guest]: And so finally he kind of demands action, and obviously action is taken and a pre-censorship
[Guest]: order is passed.
[Guest]: And the Brij Bhushan, who's the sort of printer and publisher of the organized NKR Malkani,
[Guest]: who's then the editor, again take the matter up to the Supreme Court and a kind of petition
[Guest]: is filed.
[Guest]: And both cases are heard kind of concurrently in the Supreme Court, which finally gives
[Guest]: out its judgment in May, and they're both now quite well-known cases, Brij Bhushan versus
[Guest]: the state of Delhi and Ramesh Thapar versus the state of Madras.
[Guest]: And the court's judgment basically lays out quite clearly that the ability of the state
[Guest]: to abridge the right to free speech was limited to the exceptions that had already been written
[Guest]: into the Constitution, which were libel, slander, defamation, contempt of court, or undermining
[Guest]: the security of the state.
[Guest]: But the undermining of the security of the state had to create, essentially was quite
[Guest]: a high standard.
[Guest]: It had to be undermined to the extent where disorder was of such a magnitude that it imperiled
[Guest]: the security of the state or it had the potential to overthrow the state.
[Guest]: And obviously, this did not reach that standard.
[Guest]: So the court not only countermanded both orders, it also held the relevant parts of the legislations
[Guest]: that we use, the Public Safety and Public Security Acts, to be ultra-virus.
[Guest]: And that kind of really threw the government's point off because Patel obviously, as he told
[Guest]: Nehru, it kind of knocks the bottom line out of our ability to really control the press.
[Guest]: But for Nehru, it was an even bigger problem because he thought that this was something
[Guest]: being done to undermine his peace over Church Pakistan or to, in a way, for example, he
[Guest]: writes to Raj Gopalchari and he tells him, all of this is propaganda to try and push
[Guest]: and bully me into war.
[Guest]: And it's a war that he doesn't want to have.
[Guest]: And it's curious to note that this is a demand that is also made within certain sections
[Guest]: of the Congress Party and his government.
[Guest]: Because eventually when his finance minister, John Mathai, resigns, John Mathai becomes
[Guest]: one of the first people really to publicly describe Nehru's policies towards Pakistan
[Guest]: as appeasement.
[Guest]: And he becomes the kind of first, one of the first users of that term.
[Guest]: And for Nehru, this sort of criticism of his Pakistan policy, he sees it as effectively
[Guest]: a tool being used to undermine his overture to Pakistan.
[Guest]: He suspects that there is support for that position within the Congress.
[Guest]: He, as I note in the book, he berates Patel, telling him that his actions haven't been
[Guest]: enough.
[Guest]: And I quote, Nehru obviously writes to Patel, not completely satisfied with what is going
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: I think we have taken up far too lenient an attitude towards those in India who encourage
[Guest]: this communal feeling of hatred and violence.
[Guest]: The Hindu Mahasabha talks about Akhand Bharat, which is a direct incentive to conflict.
[Guest]: The belief that retaliation is a suitable method to deal with Pakistan or what happens
[Guest]: in Pakistan is growing.
[Guest]: That is the surest way to ruin for India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: And just, I mean, even Patel, who has self-confessedly been deferring to Nehru on this matter, is
[Guest]: kind of taken aback by Nehru's criticism.
[Guest]: And he notes, again, I quote, action has been circumscribed only by the provisions of the
[Guest]: law as interpreted by legal advisors and the high courts.
[Guest]: We put thousands in jail and adopted a policy of release only after we were continually
[Guest]: attacked on the score of maintaining civil liberties.
[Guest]: And then he reminds Nehru, we are now faced with a constitution which guarantees fundamental
[Guest]: rights, right of association, right of free movement, free expression and personal liberty,
[Guest]: which further circumscribe the action we can take.
[Guest]: That means that for every executive action, there must be legal justification.
[Guest]: If within these limits, you feel that our policy towards communal organizations has
[Guest]: been lenient, steps can certainly be taken in the manner you may suggest.
[Guest]: So we, I mean, this exchange is a kind of good indication of how seriously this sort
[Guest]: of criticism of his Pakistan policy was affecting Nehru or how, indeed, how determined he was
[Guest]: to find a way to kind of, if not, you know, crush it, at least to, at least to really
[Guest]: smother it as, as far as he could.
[Guest]: And then of course, the second point of pain was the question of reservations, which had.
[Amit Varma]: But can I, while we're on the subject, can I ask a sort of a tangential question which
[Amit Varma]: arose from something you wrote during this time, one, I just want to sort of point out
[Amit Varma]: to my listeners, some of the dates involved, because, you know, Tripudaman, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: about how you were sort of taken in by the phrase of a narrative going as fast as a bullet.
[Amit Varma]: And I was, my jaw dropped open when I saw how fast the courts actually worked in that
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: Like you point out that, you know, the constitution is, it comes on January 26, 1950.
[Amit Varma]: On Feb 6, these communist detainees in Bombay file a case and they are freed on Feb 8, in
[Amit Varma]: two days they are free.
[Amit Varma]: And on Feb 11, the other communist detainees in Salem start their whole thing, which ends
[Amit Varma]: with, you know, the deaths of the 22 people.
[Amit Varma]: And that gets a crossroads to sort of, you know, write about that and Nehru defends the
[Amit Varma]: state action.
[Amit Varma]: At which point I was struck by this quote by Jayaprakash Narayan.
[Amit Varma]: And if you forget who is talking about who, there are echoes of this, which reverberate
[Amit Varma]: to this time where Jayaprakash Narayan says of Nehru, quote, the prime minister of India
[Amit Varma]: talked in the language of dictators when he maintained that we had to choose between security
[Amit Varma]: of the state and freedom of the individual, we must choose the former, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, KR Malkani, the editor of The Organizer, which is ERSS mag, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: defends the case against the pre-censorship order against it, he writes, quote, to threaten
[Amit Varma]: the liberty of the press for the sole offense of non-conformity to official view in each
[Amit Varma]: and every matter may be a handy tool for tyrants, but is only a crippling curtailment of civil
[Amit Varma]: liberties in a free democracy.
[Amit Varma]: A government can always learn more from bona fide criticism of independent thinking citizens
[Amit Varma]: than the fulsome flattery of charlatans, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, you, in referring to the case by The Organizer, which was, you know, fought
[Amit Varma]: by NC Chatterjee, you write about the case, quote, this case in itself was curious, succinct
[Amit Varma]: and informative, and an example of a great tradition of liberal thought within the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: nationalist movement that now seems to have been lost and forgotten, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you didn't elaborate on this in the book because the book is about something else entirely.
[Amit Varma]: But I nevertheless want to go on this tangent and ask you about this tradition of liberal
[Amit Varma]: thought within the Hindu nationalist movement.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, why is it lost and forgotten, as you describe it?
[Guest]: What is your sense of it?
[Guest]: It's interesting that you mentioned that because there were several quotes, of course, there's
[Guest]: that one by Malkani.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are many quotes by Shyamaprasad Mukherjee, where he is very eloquently defending
[Amit Varma]: the right to free speech and the fundamental rights and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm more interested by what you term the liberal tradition within the sort of the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: nationalist movement.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I mentioned it in the context of this, because it's interesting that both
[Guest]: Crossroads and the Organizer basically criticize the Nehru government along similar sort of
[Guest]: pathways.
[Guest]: They criticize them for being heavy handed, for trampling on civil liberties, for not
[Guest]: taking oppositional views on board, for encouraging ideological conformity.
[Guest]: And they criticize them using a kind of terminology that we would now recognize as quite distinctly
[Guest]: liberal.
[Guest]: So, respect for individual freedom, respect for the right to free speech, tolerance of
[Guest]: dissent and criticism.
[Guest]: These are profoundly, profoundly liberal virtues.
[Guest]: And this argument is made by K. R. Malkani in his columns.
[Guest]: This argument is made by N. C. Chatterjee, who again, by the way, is a former Hindu Mahasabha
[Guest]: stalwart in his submissions in court.
[Guest]: And this argument is made by Shyamaprasad Mukherjee in his interventions in Parliament.
[Guest]: And all sort of frame their arguments in these terms.
[Guest]: Now, there is, I'm sure a lot of people would say that that's just what was expedient at
[Guest]: the time.
[Guest]: And this is just a matter of kind of using the constitutional defenses that you have
[Guest]: to have your own way.
[Guest]: And that's perfectly, I'm sure there was an element of that.
[Guest]: But equally, it to me looks like a kind of distinct liberal tradition, because you have
[Guest]: all the kind of, both the political element of it, and the kind of, how should I put it,
[Guest]: the ideological element, because for want of a better word, I mean, the organizer does
[Guest]: represent the official viewpoint of the RSS.
[Guest]: And what comes across to me is a kind of element of liberal thought, which should realistically
[Guest]: have been nourished and encouraged, rather than clamped down on.
[Guest]: And that's, I think, one of the more unfortunate parts of the whole story of the First Amendment
[Guest]: is the fact that this sort of narrow dispensation is willing to countenance the use of distinctly
[Guest]: illiberal legal and constitutional tools to clamp down on a kind of ideological position
[Guest]: that, while kind of discredited in the Narrowvian era, did nevertheless consistently enjoy a
[Guest]: sort of reasonable modicum of public support.
[Guest]: And I think that's something that as a statesman, he should have seen through, or should, I
[Guest]: mean, it's a kind of tradition that I feel should have been encouraged.
[Guest]: Obviously, it's a kind of tradition that is lost because the ideological and political
[Guest]: successes of these people who are now, I mean, if you ever go to, if you ever see the inside
[Guest]: of a BJP office, you will always have a huge portrait of Shyam Prasad Mukherjee.
[Guest]: But even within that stream of thought, people have really forgotten or maybe deliberately
[Guest]: ignored the fact that Mukherjee was not the kind of bigoted authoritarian figure that
[Guest]: people might imagine him to be.
[Guest]: He was, in many ways, a sort of textbook case of classical liberalism.
[Guest]: So that again, that's again, a very, very interesting part of the story with tremendous
[Guest]: contemporary relevance.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even before reading your book, you know, whenever I've come across like the Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: Nehru debates in the sort of Constituent Assembly debates and the debates they had during the
[Amit Varma]: first amendment, it always struck me that, you know, if you just reproduce a dialogue
[Amit Varma]: and you blank out the names, it would appear that it is definitely Shyam Prasad Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: who is a great liberal and a Nehru who is a, you know, a dictatorial despot, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And here also, it strikes me that like one thing which is, you know, I think certainly
[Amit Varma]: true is that it's very easy to appear virtuous in opposition, because you can say whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, you can do all the signaling in the right way.
[Amit Varma]: It's like, we don't even have to go as far back as Shyam Prasad.
[Amit Varma]: Even pre the 2014 elections, you know, Narendra Modi was making a lot of noises which would
[Amit Varma]: please liberals, especially about downsizing government, minimum government, maximum governance
[Amit Varma]: and the government has no business to be in business and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, his actions have gone in the opposite direction.
[Amit Varma]: But he was making a lot of noises even, you know, Salman's source of the Congress was
[Amit Varma]: on my show.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that even he approved of a lot of the rhetoric.
[Amit Varma]: So when Modi came to power, even Salman in the Congress was cautiously optimistic that
[Amit Varma]: he'll actually deliver on some of those things.
[Amit Varma]: But the imperatives of actually being in government seemed to me to be quite different from the
[Amit Varma]: imperatives of, you know, being in opposition, for example, you know, when you are in that
[Amit Varma]: position of responsibility, where you have to sort of juggle 100 different things and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and actually get things done, is there then a battle between pragmatism and
[Amit Varma]: principles which plays out where, you know, a Sardar Patel can say that it is okay for
[Amit Varma]: you to say whatever you want sitting where you are, but I have the responsibility of
[Amit Varma]: being the Home Minister and therefore security does matter.
[Amit Varma]: And you can leave your security freedom debate elsewhere, but I have to keep the country
[Amit Varma]: together.
[Amit Varma]: And these are, of course, in the fraught times after there has been so much trouble bringing
[Amit Varma]: the country together in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: So is that always a constant tussle where those who are in the opposition will always
[Amit Varma]: seem more virtuous than those in the government because you are judging those in the government
[Amit Varma]: by their actions, while you're judging those in opposition by their words?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, there's to a certain extent, that's true.
[Guest]: And there are, Patel often makes the case that as the kind of person responsible for
[Guest]: the nation's security, there are things that just need to be done.
[Guest]: But equally, I think it's, there is more happening than that.
[Guest]: And the reason that comes through with the kind of internal opposition that is triggered
[Guest]: within the Congress Party and that comes from the sort of indications that things are not,
[Guest]: obviously there's often a gap between the ideals that, you know, nations and governments
[Guest]: and political parties profess and the imperatives of government.
[Guest]: But that things are not really going as had been imagined, that there are plenty of indications
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: Those indications come from the speaker at some point where he writes to Nehru, for example,
[Guest]: to say, you know, express his disapproval of the frequent recourse to the use of presidential
[Guest]: ordinances.
[Guest]: It comes from sort of dissident congressmen, like figures like Acharya Kriplani.
[Guest]: Now, of course, people can make the case that, you know, Kriplani was upset because he hadn't
[Guest]: been made a minister and he hadn't, you know, won the election to the Congress presidency
[Guest]: and he was kind of sidelined.
[Guest]: And perhaps some of his criticism did come from there.
[Guest]: But if we are to kind of constantly simply assume an ulterior motive or a motive driven
[Guest]: solely by realpolitik, I think that would also be a bit unfair.
[Guest]: And the fact that perhaps it was easy for Malkani and Mukherjee, etc., to deploy the
[Guest]: kind of rhetoric of liberalism while not being saddled with the responsibility of government.
[Guest]: And in truth, we can never really have a firm answer to that question.
[Guest]: But there are plenty of indications that even within the Congress, there was disquiet at
[Guest]: the way things were being done.
[Guest]: And you get that from quite senior, quite pivotal figures, from Rajendra Prasad, from
[Guest]: Acharya Kriplani, from G. V. Mavlankar, and indeed from some dissidents who kind of speak
[Guest]: up during the debate.
[Guest]: And some of the things that are often said both by Nehru and by other figures within
[Guest]: the Congress establishment would, I mean, quite shocking, at least surprising if not
[Guest]: shocking to read because, I mean, you have figures like Hare Krishna Mehta who basically
[Guest]: tells Nehru that the real culprits are actually things such as the right to equality itself,
[Guest]: which shouldn't be there.
[Guest]: So there is a kind of disquiet within the Congress which would, I think, give some credence
[Guest]: at least or at least some reason for us to give figures such as Mukherjee a kind of,
[Guest]: if not 100% of our indulgence, at least, you know, 50% of our indulgence.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I mean, Mukherjee was part of the cabinet and he did quit in protest.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, he could just have stayed a minister had he wanted.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and then come back to continue exploring the fault
[Amit Varma]: lines that led to the First Amendment of the Indian Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches, and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win-win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not.
[Amit Varma]: You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to IndianColors.com, that's Colors with an OU, and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: UNSEEN for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with the historian Tripudaman Singh about his fabulous book where the narrative
[Amit Varma]: goes as fast as a bullet, 16 Stormy Days.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, while Tripudaman's book, the narrative does go as fast as a bullet, my
[Amit Varma]: show is a little bit more leisurely, which is why we have reached the break and we have
[Amit Varma]: only finished two of the three fault lines that kind of led to the first amendment being
[Amit Varma]: felt necessary by Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: Two of them to quickly recap are, of course, that he wanted to enact zamindari reforms
[Amit Varma]: and that was struck down by the Bihar High Court and was, you know, there was litigation
[Amit Varma]: in other places and the Bihar High Court struck it down on the grounds of the right to equality,
[Amit Varma]: but it was also sort of challenged on the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: And even though experts felt that you could have redrafted those laws and got them through
[Amit Varma]: and made them constitutional, Nehru was a man in a hurry.
[Amit Varma]: The second, of course, is the free speech laws.
[Amit Varma]: Now we think of Article 19.1, I certainly do, as, you know, being, you know, the opposite
[Amit Varma]: of the pristine First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which sanctifies free speech,
[Amit Varma]: but in this particular case, it has a bunch of caveats.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that the original constitution enacted on 26 Jan 1950 had some
[Amit Varma]: of these caveats, but the First Amendment brought in a bunch more like public order
[Amit Varma]: and so on, which can be left open to the interpretation of governments.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a fault line there because he tried, he banned Crossroads, which was a communist
[Amit Varma]: magazine, and he tried to impose pre-censorship on the organizer, the RSS magazine.
[Amit Varma]: Both of those fine parties went to court and the law moved a little bit quicker than it
[Amit Varma]: does today, and both of them won.
[Amit Varma]: So Nehru's also now thinking, okay, not just right to property, not just right to equality,
[Amit Varma]: there's also right to free speech.
[Amit Varma]: Where's the third fault line to put them and tell me a bit about how that came about?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: Just, I mean, just before I move on to that, a quick kind of detour back to what we were
[Guest]: talking about was, I think, when I mentioned that there was disquiet within the kind of
[Guest]: Congress establishment as well, I think the most important indication of this, as early
[Guest]: as April 1950, comes from Sardar Patel, whose letter to Nehru I quoted, where he, you know,
[Guest]: kind of reminds him of the fact that whatever they have to do has to be within constitutional
[Guest]: bounds.
[Guest]: And now Patel is quite ambivalent about his commitment to expansive free speech, and he
[Guest]: obviously tells, he once does note to Nehru that they will have to consider amendments
[Guest]: to the constitution at some point, or that the right to free speech was the result of
[Guest]: idealistic exuberance.
[Guest]: But Patel's letter is also a kind of, its tone is very sarcastic.
[Guest]: It notes things which, I mean, it's basically telling Nehru things that, you know, you would
[Guest]: expect a grade six student studying civics to know.
[Guest]: And so I would see that as a kind of indication that even Patel did somewhere think that what
[Guest]: Nehru was asking him to do was to essentially set aside constitutional bounds and contemplate
[Guest]: action that would quite clearly breach constitutional norms.
[Guest]: So I think knowing that we have to be willing to give some benefit of the doubt to figures
[Guest]: like Malkani and Mukherjee, obviously, we can't, we can never quite know what they would
[Guest]: have done in government, but we can give them some benefit of the doubt to say that the
[Guest]: position that they were taking up were not simply the result of real politics, but also
[Guest]: of some sort of ideological conviction.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I should clarify that when I phrased that earlier question, I did not mean
[Amit Varma]: to cynically imply that, oh, in opposition, you will be virtuous only because you're in
[Amit Varma]: opposition and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, there are complex currents in the affairs of men.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, people do things for multifactorial reasons, many of which they themselves might
[Amit Varma]: not be aware of.
[Amit Varma]: So while I think in general, we should take people at face value unless we have reason
[Amit Varma]: to believe otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, as a friend of mine, like saying, assume goodwill.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, there's no reason to do otherwise with either Malkani or Shyamaprasad Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: or Jayaprakash Narayan or, you know, any of the eminences who kind of oppose the amendment.
[Amit Varma]: And while we are on the subject, I'll quickly quote from your book to show what a wide range
[Amit Varma]: of opposition there was to Nehru at this time, where you write, quote, Hindu nationalists
[Amit Varma]: like S.P.
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee and M.R.
[Amit Varma]: Jaikar, Gandhian stalwarts like Acharya Kripalani, committed socialists like Shibbanlal Saxena
[Amit Varma]: and Jayaprakash Narayan, conscientious Congress rebels like H.V.
[Amit Varma]: Kamant, Svanandan Sahay and K.K.
[Amit Varma]: Bhattacharya, jurists like Pranath Mehra and M.C.
[Amit Varma]: Chagla, press associations, editors, lawyers and businessmen, men whose ideological and
[Amit Varma]: editorial successes today might scarcely believe, but would do well to remember that their predecessors
[Amit Varma]: held the views they did, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And while you brought Patel in, I was also kind of, you know, before we get to the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the third fault line, I was also struck by a quote about Nehru and Patel, which I
[Amit Varma]: thought I'll ask you about later.
[Amit Varma]: But as we are on the subject now, where you wrote, quote, their commitment to civil liberties
[Amit Varma]: and individual freedom or the lack thereof represented a rare consensus between the two
[Amit Varma]: giants of Indian politics, stop quote, who would have thunk.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess their skepticism towards fundamental rights, which, you know, as you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Patel at one point said reflected quote, idealistic exuberance, I guess, would
[Amit Varma]: have come for different reasons.
[Amit Varma]: For Patel, it would have been that look, I have a tough job to do, the security at stake
[Amit Varma]: there is, you know, we take the nation for granted today at the time Patel was Home Minister,
[Amit Varma]: he had just managed to cobble it together, almost in a new act of imperialism as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And the priority was to hold it together and the rights were in the way.
[Amit Varma]: While for Nehru, to be honest, he had been consistent all his political life about his
[Amit Varma]: values being social progressivism and all of the things that went along with that, like
[Amit Varma]: Zamindari reforms and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And again, the constitution was sort of an impediment to that.
[Amit Varma]: Is that sort of a correct characterization that they were coming from a different place,
[Amit Varma]: which was, you know, and the constitution was a separate thing.
[Amit Varma]: Today we talk about the constitution and the values it embodies as almost holy and sacramental,
[Amit Varma]: but in those tumultuous times, it would not have had the place it did, even in the minds
[Guest]: of those who drafted it.
[Guest]: You're right.
[Guest]: I mean, there was a kind of sense of consensus between them on the constitution, but they
[Guest]: did approach it, as you rightly point out, from different angles.
[Guest]: And perhaps, yes, it didn't really have the kind of same sense of sanctity that it seems
[Guest]: to have now, at least, I mean, I'm not sure how much sanctity it really has, but at least
[Guest]: in the public mind, that kind of sanctity attaches to it.
[Guest]: But it's interesting to note that when the constitution first comes into force, everyone
[Guest]: gives a statement saying, yes, you know, we have to maintain the sanctity of the constitution,
[Guest]: et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, when the amendment finally reaches parliament and it's criticized
[Guest]: for the fact that it's being amended so soon without a general election, you know, by an
[Guest]: unelected body, Nehru makes a kind of response by saying that since we were competent to
[Guest]: make it, we should be competent to amend it as well.
[Guest]: And I think that kind of just supports what you said, really, that they saw it as almost
[Guest]: as something that was there as a kind of vehicle towards a particular end, perhaps rather than
[Guest]: an end in itself.
[Guest]: And that end, nobody was quite sure of, because for Nehru that end represented a kind of particular
[Guest]: kind of social progressivism.
[Guest]: For others, it represented a kind of, I think, especially for Rajendra Prasad, it represented
[Guest]: a kind of stable property order.
[Guest]: And for quite others, it represented a kind of liberal democracy as they had come to expect
[Guest]: by looking at what had happened in Europe and America.
[Guest]: And so nobody, I think, because there was no real kind of consensus on what exactly
[Guest]: the end was, people saw it as a vehicle towards a particular end, but they didn't quite agree
[Amit Varma]: on what that end really was.
[Amit Varma]: So can I ask you a broader question now that I'd actually save for the end, but again,
[Amit Varma]: we are sort of on the subject, which is, I mean, two broader questions, really.
[Amit Varma]: And the first one is about just this notion of what India should be, sort of the competing
[Amit Varma]: early ideas of India, which can even merge into one idea of India, you know, as you've
[Amit Varma]: shown in your book, they can mean different things.
[Amit Varma]: And one is, of course, the sort of democracy Nehru had in mind, which would aim at a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of social equality and social justice, and so on, and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, a constitutional republic, where you would be bound by certain rules
[Amit Varma]: of the game, which would constrain the behavior of the state and, you know, circumscribe what
[Amit Varma]: the state could do to its citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that at the heart of this, there is an inherent contradiction.
[Amit Varma]: And that contradiction has very much to do with, you know, how you think of means versus
[Amit Varma]: ends.
[Amit Varma]: While where Nehru's thinking was that, look, my ends are that these are the things I want
[Amit Varma]: to achieve.
[Amit Varma]: And these are my means of doing so.
[Amit Varma]: And one could, you know, even argue that even those means are flawed, because they are based
[Amit Varma]: on top down thinking, and they didn't actually get anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless, that could be his way of looking at it, while the constitutional way of thinking
[Amit Varma]: would be that the means are everything, that you have to protect individual rights, you
[Amit Varma]: have to respect individual autonomy, the citizen is a master of the state and not the other
[Amit Varma]: way around.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where all the fundamental rights come up.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think that there is, and to me, it seems that, you know, your book describes
[Amit Varma]: a period of time where the people in power are at the heart of this conflict, and they
[Amit Varma]: are choosing their democratic ends over constitutional means.
[Amit Varma]: And to do this, they're completely subverting the constitution.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I really think we, you know, as your book kind of makes explicit, we had a real
[Amit Varma]: liberal constitution for perhaps 14 months of our history.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, we didn't, it's a periodical and whoever is in power does whatever the
[Amit Varma]: hell they want with it.
[Amit Varma]: So to your end, is this a tragic outcome that the two went in different directions?
[Amit Varma]: Or is that conflict something that simply cannot be negotiated?
[Amit Varma]: It's just, you know, between being a democracy, what the popular will of the people is and
[Amit Varma]: constitutional values per se.
[Guest]: I mean, I think, but at some level, that conflict is kind of inherent in any sort of democratic
[Guest]: setup, because the temptation to do certain things or to kind of take shortcuts is always
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And one of the arguments that's often deployed is that, you know, part and parcel of a democratic
[Guest]: system is to reflect the will of the people.
[Guest]: And Nehru deploys this argument, I think, in a flawed manner, because obviously there
[Guest]: has been no democratic mandate yet by, you know, saying that the legislature has to decide
[Guest]: on matters of social policy and wherever the constitution comes in the way of the will
[Guest]: of the people, then obviously the constitution has to give way.
[Guest]: So I don't think you can completely avoid that conflict anywhere.
[Guest]: But the answers that you reach or the sort of mechanisms that are devised to mediate
[Guest]: that conflict, I mean, ultimately that's where all of the action is.
[Guest]: And Nehru's view very much is of a kind that one would, you know, for example, expect somewhere
[Guest]: in somewhere like Britain, where parliamentary sovereignty is kind of expansive and there
[Guest]: is no written constitution.
[Guest]: So whatever parliament does is, you know, ipso facto that it is constitutional, whereas
[Guest]: a written constitution by its very nature is meant to contain and circumscribe the actions
[Guest]: of the branches of government or the branches of the state, rather.
[Guest]: And that's kind of, I recently read political theorist Madhav Khosla's book on the constitution.
[Guest]: And again, that's one of the arguments that he makes is that one of the reasons that the
[Guest]: constitution is so lengthy was because they didn't simply want to delineate general principles,
[Guest]: but to kind of contain and guide the actions of future legislators, judges and politicians
[Guest]: in a particular direction.
[Guest]: And that's one of the reasons why the constitution goes into so much detail.
[Guest]: And it's a point that Mukherjee makes repeatedly when the amendment is introduced into parliament,
[Guest]: saying that the very fact that if this is what we wanted to do, then we should not have
[Guest]: had a written constitution in the first place.
[Guest]: Having a written constitution, especially one as detailed as ours, comes with a set
[Guest]: of implications, which means that you are constrained in what you can do.
[Guest]: And yes, there is a kind of system of amendment.
[Guest]: But even for that system of amendment to be kind of scrupulously followed, you have to
[Guest]: have an election and two elected houses of parliament.
[Guest]: And so that conflict can't be avoided, but the conclusions that Nehru came to certainly
[Guest]: could have been.
[Guest]: And there were plenty of people who disagreed with it.
[Guest]: And I think, in my opinion, they were right.
[Guest]: I'm sure probably were others who felt differently.
[Guest]: But once you normalize, and again, if I can just go to the Mukherjee's retort to Nehru
[Guest]: really makes clear where he says, you know, you may be in power for this generation or
[Guest]: for generations unborn, but supposing someone else comes into government, what is the precedent
[Guest]: that you're laying down?
[Guest]: And that's, I think, one of the most unfortunate consequences is that once you create a precedent
[Guest]: and an avenue for something to be done, there's really nothing stopping someone else from
[Guest]: utilizing the same mechanisms to the opposite effect.
[Guest]: And that's kind of how, and Mukherjee has been proven true, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I have three kind of observations here.
[Amit Varma]: One is I had done an episode with Gyan Prakash on the emergency and the point he made there,
[Amit Varma]: and you also quoted him in your book, is that, look, what Indira Gandhi did in 75 calling
[Amit Varma]: the emergency was not unconstitutional or extraordinary.
[Amit Varma]: It was delineated in the powers given to the state.
[Amit Varma]: Those extreme powers were given to the state.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that's in the design of the state, which to a large extent remains.
[Amit Varma]: The second thought that strikes me is that in this position that Nehru is taking in constitutional
[Amit Varma]: morality versus democracy, and I agree with you that he took the wrong position.
[Amit Varma]: And in this position that he is taking, you could argue that in the long run, he is laying
[Amit Varma]: down the roots of a Hindu Rashtra, because if our society is such that the kind of dispensation
[Amit Varma]: that is in power today will one day get into the government, if you follow Nehru's argument
[Amit Varma]: to his logical end, then that means that these guys would be correct to change the constitution
[Amit Varma]: to reflect what they feel is a popular mandate that they have got.
[Amit Varma]: And many of the people from, you know, Nehru's party today would sort of perhaps not recognize
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a logical end of Nehru's own kind of actions.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one common question that I often ask my guests, so much so that it's almost
[Amit Varma]: become a cliche, and I'm sure you've heard it in past episodes is about this odd paradox
[Amit Varma]: of our constitution, which is, and let's go to the original 1950 constitution and imagine
[Amit Varma]: that the First Amendment isn't there yet, and which is of a relatively liberal constitution
[Amit Varma]: being imposed on an illiberal society.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, then how liberal can that imposition be, that a group of unelected elites, as it
[Amit Varma]: were, are sitting and saying that these are the values that we should live by.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that, you know, I feel conflicted about, because those values, of
[Amit Varma]: course, I agree with.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I can't square that circle and say that, why should I, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the core part of my value system is that I shall not impose my values on others.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how does one square that circle?
[Guest]: What are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Interesting question.
[Guest]: There is one very revealing quote, I'm not sure who said it in the Constituent Assembly,
[Guest]: but someone said, you know, we were expecting the sounds of the veena and we got the sounds
[Guest]: of an orchestra or something.
[Guest]: It's something like that.
[Guest]: Essentially, many people felt that the constitution wasn't rooted in a kind of, in the social
[Guest]: milieu in which it was being born.
[Guest]: And the one of, again, I kind of quote, I'm quoting Madhav Khosla here, because his most
[Guest]: recent study of the constitution, the argument is that the constitution in itself is a kind
[Guest]: of pedagogic document.
[Guest]: So by practicing what the constitution is giving, you will be creating a kind of democratic
[Guest]: citizen rather than there being a kind of popular upsurge, which results in the constitution.
[Guest]: And it's an interesting, it's an interesting argument to make, because there is a sense
[Guest]: that's what people thought.
[Guest]: But equally it's, I mean, people are not very willing to be kind of educated in that way.
[Guest]: And everyone kind of recognized that, and Ambedkar most prominently recognized that
[Guest]: what was happening was that you were creating a kind of, you know, in his words, a democratic
[Guest]: topsoil, topsoil based on the sort of subsoil of an undemocratic society.
[Guest]: And it was an experiment.
[Guest]: It was, you know, most constitutional scholars, you know, journalists, et cetera, everybody
[Guest]: noted that it was a kind of brave and great experiment in democratic government.
[Guest]: And that's one of the things that makes it so exceptional is the fact that it was a kind
[Guest]: of leap of faith.
[Guest]: But having committed themselves to it, the mistake that India's sort of early post-colonial
[Guest]: elite made is the same that the British made when they first introduced provincial legislate,
[Guest]: like popular legislatures in the provinces, is that once you introduce a kind of democratic
[Guest]: system or a constitutional system, you have to be at some level willing to bear the consequences
[Guest]: that accrue.
[Guest]: And that was something that the Indian elite was unwilling to do.
[Guest]: Now, we can make the case that there was, as Nehru tried to make, that there was a kind
[Guest]: of grave threat to national security, to public order, and we can debate whether there was,
[Guest]: but equally there are as many important figures who refuse to believe that such a thing existed,
[Guest]: that there was such a grave threat.
[Guest]: So I think squaring that kind of circle requires a certain broad-based commitment to the constitutional
[Guest]: ideal that was, I think, not quite present even within the Congress party.
[Guest]: And that's, I think, we're still kind of struggling to really square that circle because we've,
[Guest]: in a way, uncorked a genie almost with the First Amendment.
[Guest]: And obviously now it's been amended about 105 times, I think, possibly even more.
[Guest]: And we're now at a point where without kind of going back to and redeveloping a sort of
[Guest]: consensus on constitutional first principles, really, it's difficult to even contemplate
[Guest]: squaring that circle because if you ask the two sides of the political divide, they have
[Guest]: almost completely diametrically opposite readings of what the Constitution is and what it represents.
[Guest]: And to square that is, I mean, it's quite a difficult proposition.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, now, as you said, it's a done deal.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, I mean, people don't realize this.
[Amit Varma]: People often express shock and horror when they think of the BJP wanting to amend the
[Amit Varma]: Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, as I mentioned earlier, there was an old cartoon about how it's not a book,
[Amit Varma]: but a periodical.
[Amit Varma]: And the economist Shruti Rajgopalan, who's a frequent guest on the show, had once given
[Amit Varma]: a talk on YouTube, which I'll link to where she talks about all the different amendments
[Amit Varma]: under Nehru to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, some people have this impression that, hey, the amendments and the messing
[Amit Varma]: around started with Indira Gandhi and Nehru was a constitutionalist.
[Amit Varma]: And that's just a rubbish as, you know, your book and subsequent events also show.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that I'm kind of struck by to sort of continue thinking aloud and be
[Amit Varma]: on a tangent is that what we often have, what disturbs me today, especially about politics
[Amit Varma]: is that politics has, and I imagine it was, you know, I would have thought it was less
[Amit Varma]: so in Nehru's time, but, you know, who knows.
[Amit Varma]: But what it has become is that it is tribal to the extent that people just care about
[Amit Varma]: which tribe they are part of and not about principles per se.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you'll have people protesting about 153A and 295A when it's being used against
[Amit Varma]: one of their own, but they're quite happy to, you know, see it used against somebody
[Amit Varma]: else where, you know, how you judge a policy really comes down to which side you're on
[Amit Varma]: and which side is carrying the policy out.
[Amit Varma]: Like in these recent farm bills, for example, I was, you know, it's interesting how a lot
[Amit Varma]: of what has been enacted in these farm bills was part of the Congress manifesto in 2019
[Amit Varma]: and they're protesting those very same things.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore it's become a politics of just tribalism of you pick your side and you go
[Amit Varma]: with it and not principles per se.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore it strikes me that no view that sort of really takes constitutionalism seriously
[Amit Varma]: is going to, you know, get any kind of traction because people don't care about principles
[Amit Varma]: even today.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's just about which side you're on and then you say whatever, but in practice
[Amit Varma]: you don't.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is a bit of an aside from me, I'm just thinking aloud, but what are sort
[Amit Varma]: of your thoughts on this and going back to that time, was there a sense of it then because
[Amit Varma]: the parties weren't so hardened and, you know, different things from each other at the time?
[Guest]: Well, you're right.
[Guest]: They don't really think in terms of those sort of principles, but as the book bears
[Guest]: out they didn't seem to be thinking that strongly about principles, you know, in 1951 either.
[Guest]: And I think the way to really, and principles are, I feel like, quite a sort of top-down
[Guest]: manner.
[Guest]: The leaders have to demonstrate a commitment to constitutional morality if they expect
[Guest]: it to kind of percolate downwards.
[Guest]: And they just didn't, right from the word go.
[Guest]: Again, in the context of the book you have, you know, at one point Nehru buried someone
[Guest]: like K.V.
[Guest]: Kamath, who, you know, intervenes at some point and he asked him not to quote things
[Guest]: which are relevant at the time of the French Revolution and, you know, the American Revolution.
[Guest]: So that was, I think, a pivotal moment in demonstrating that constitutional principles
[Guest]: could be undone in pursuit of an obviously political agenda.
[Guest]: In today's day and age, again, because it's something, I think, each precedent kind of
[Guest]: builds on what comes before.
[Guest]: Things get normalized very, very quickly.
[Guest]: Things that we, you know, laws such as, you know, 153A and 295A, as you mentioned, which
[Guest]: we now take for granted as existing in the books.
[Guest]: We often don't remember that, you know, they were, as intended by the Constituent Assembly,
[Guest]: these were not supposed to be allowed to continue.
[Guest]: So it's, even back then, the situation was not drastically different.
[Guest]: I mean, it was different to the extent that there was a sense of idealism and a particular
[Guest]: dispensation was in power and remained in power for a very long time.
[Guest]: But I don't think it was very different in terms of attitudes or in terms of commitment
[Guest]: to constitutional principles, because if the constitution itself is malleable and changeable,
[Guest]: it can't really, it obviously can't lead to a kind of enduring legal norms if those norms
[Guest]: themselves are subject to frequent change.
[Guest]: I think that's kind of what I would say to that, really.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll again sort of quote from your book, because we are speaking about 153A and 295A
[Amit Varma]: and there's also 124A, which is sedition.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out in your book quote, far from being a simple remnant of colonialism,
[Amit Varma]: sedition is an outcome of the first amendment of the constitution and the narrow government's
[Amit Varma]: desire to clamp down on critical voices unencumbered by constitutional obligations, a truly deliberate
[Amit Varma]: and strategic assault on the constitution and fundamental rights, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And so just clarify this for me, that my impression about these laws, 124A, 153A, 295A was that
[Amit Varma]: any of the laws that are in the Indian penal code can be challenged if they are unconstitutional
[Amit Varma]: and struck down.
[Amit Varma]: And that is what would have happened in the case of these laws in the normal course of
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: But the first amendment added those other sort of caveats to free speech.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, these laws kind of remained in the book.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you're saying it's a responsibility of the first amendment and Nehru therefore,
[Amit Varma]: that we have the law of sedition with us.
[Amit Varma]: Is that correct?
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: And not only the idea that they would have been struck down, in fact, they were struck
[Guest]: down most prominently in the case of Master Tara Singh in Punjab, when he was charged
[Guest]: with sedition and the court held sedition to be unconstitutional.
[Guest]: And sedition was, I mean, it was very clear that it was unconstitutional.
[Guest]: It was very clear that the Constituent Assembly didn't want it and they didn't want it especially
[Guest]: because of its association with repression in the British period, because most of the
[Guest]: Congress stalwarts had been charged with sedition and jailed.
[Guest]: And it's a point they make repeatedly during the debate that this was an act that was used
[Guest]: against patriots and nationalists under British rule.
[Guest]: And we can't be, I mean, we shouldn't, really shouldn't be bringing it back on the books.
[Guest]: But it was, yes, you're absolutely right, they were unconstitutional.
[Guest]: And they were brought back, they were brought back for a particular end.
[Guest]: You might say that, well, the ends that Nehru thought were benevolent or somehow justified,
[Guest]: but they were brought back.
[Guest]: I mean, there was, it's perhaps hard to imagine now, but there was a period in time where
[Guest]: these sections of the Indian Penal Code were unconstitutional.
[Guest]: You could not be charged with sedition in the year 1950 because it was an unconstitutional
[Guest]: part of the IPC.
[Guest]: And I mean, I don't think Nehru alone is responsible, because obviously, there's been plenty of
[Guest]: opportunities to repeal it or replace it with something else, and they haven't been taken.
[Guest]: But Nehru is responsible to the extent that he creates a set of legal tools, which he
[Guest]: describes kind of quite ironically as something that he wants to leave for the succeeding
[Guest]: generations.
[Guest]: And well, here we are.
[Amit Varma]: And here we are indeed.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, your book goes like a bullet.
[Amit Varma]: This episode has been floating like a feather.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of get back to the narrative and get back to the third fault line.
[Amit Varma]: We've already spoken about the zamindari reforms, which the fundamental rights came in the way
[Amit Varma]: of the right to property and the right to equality.
[Amit Varma]: We've spoken about how he wanted to control the press and the right to free speech came
[Amit Varma]: in the way of that.
[Amit Varma]: And what's the third fault line?
[Guest]: So the third fault line is reservations, and that, again, is something that begins in Madras.
[Guest]: Because I mean, Madras had been, the erstwhile Madras province, had been a kind of crucible
[Guest]: for social justice politics with the creation of the Justice Party, the kind of appearance
[Guest]: of Periyar, and the Justice Party had kind of enacted all of these sort of mechanisms,
[Guest]: social justice mechanisms, amongst which was something called the communal general order,
[Guest]: which allocated government employment and access to educational and government educational
[Guest]: institutes in a particular ratio amongst communities.
[Guest]: It was quite a peculiar instrument because what it did was it kind of allocated seats,
[Guest]: for example, in a particular ratio.
[Guest]: And so if the ratio was, I think it was something like every 14 seats, five could be Brahmins
[Guest]: and three would be something else.
[Guest]: So there would only be five Brahmins and it didn't matter if it was, I mean, it was almost
[Guest]: a kind of ironclad quota, a kind of government-sanctioned distribution almost in a particular ratio
[Guest]: rather than the way we understand reservations now.
[Guest]: And so if only seven Brahmins were allowed, then the number of Brahmins could not be greater
[Guest]: than seven, for example, or if the number of Harijans that were allowed was six out
[Guest]: of 14, then they could not be six out of 14.
[Guest]: It's not as if someone could get greater marks and go into another quota.
[Guest]: So everyone was really subject to this system of quotas and that was challenged by a woman
[Guest]: named Champakam Durairajan who had interestingly not even actually applied for admission but
[Guest]: wanted to apply for admission and had been effectively told that her grades wouldn't
[Guest]: allow her in through the Brahmin quota.
[Guest]: And obviously there were other people with lower grades who would get in from their own
[Guest]: community-based quotas.
[Guest]: And so she kind of files a petition in the High Court in Madras.
[Guest]: And the High Court in Madras, it arouses quite a lot of passion because it's a kind of great,
[Guest]: it's a question that touches upon a lot of lives and you have a lot of protests, etc.
[Guest]: The court holds a kind of interesting position.
[Guest]: So what the court effectively does is the court finds the communal general order unconstitutional
[Guest]: but what it also notes is that considerations of caste and community were not only not allowed,
[Guest]: they were expressly taboo and that's the kind of language, it's quite stern, the language
[Guest]: the court uses.
[Guest]: And they keep saying basically that the right to equality and the right to freedom from
[Guest]: discrimination will effectively become empty bubbles if the executive orders like the communal
[Guest]: general order are allowed to be implemented or allowed to continue.
[Guest]: So basically, again, an interesting aside, the petitioners were represented by the noted
[Guest]: lawyer Alladi Krishnaswami Iyer, who again had been one of the key architects of the
[Guest]: constitution and also someone who advised the government on the amendment, which nullified
[Guest]: a court order that he himself had won, which I still find the kind of intellectual somersaults
[Guest]: that many of these people perform to be quite interesting.
[Guest]: What the Madras government basically submits in court, it doesn't, it never really argued
[Guest]: that the quotas didn't amount to discrimination.
[Guest]: What it said was as a result of applying the ratio prescribed by the communal geo, 77 Brahmins,
[Guest]: 224 non-Brahmins, 51 Christians, 26 Muslims and 26 Harijans had been selected for admission
[Guest]: to engineering colleges.
[Guest]: If caste and community considerations had been ignored, the numbers would have been
[Guest]: 249 Brahmins, 112 non-Brahmins, 22 Christians, 3 Muslims and 0 Harijans.
[Guest]: So to avoid this sort of system and to fulfil what they saw as a responsibility under the
[Guest]: director principles of state policy, they had created this order.
[Guest]: But again, the court, and if you don't mind, I'll just quote from the court order again,
[Guest]: they say the communal geo denies equal treatment for all citizens under like circumstances
[Guest]: and conditions, both in the privileges conferred and the disabilities imposed.
[Guest]: It shuts out students having high qualifications solely on the grounds of their caste or religion
[Guest]: and lets in others with inferior qualifications on the same ground.
[Guest]: As the articles of the constitution stand at present, it is difficult to see how the
[Guest]: state can make discrimination between applicant and applicant on the grounds of religion or
[Guest]: caste and restrict the number of seats that could be secured by applicants of any particular
[Guest]: religion or caste, or prescribe different qualifications to applicants of different
[Guest]: religions or castes to the advantage of some and the disadvantage of others.
[Guest]: Does social justice or the welfare of the state require a suppression of the integrity
[Guest]: and freedom of the individual personality of the citizen by reason of his belonging
[Guest]: to a particular caste?
[Guest]: And so the court is quite strict and it, I mean, even when they end the judgment, and
[Guest]: I quote again, if the person in charge for the time being of a state elected no doubt
[Guest]: by a majority of voters at the polls were free to enforce their own notions of social
[Guest]: and economic justice unfettered by constitutional restraints, there is a possibility of serious
[Guest]: and undeserved hardship and injury to large classes of citizens.
[Guest]: Suppression of a guaranteed right in article 15.1 of the constitution would be worthless
[Guest]: if the government could disregard or nullify it by executive acts like the communal general
[Guest]: order.
[Guest]: And so the court is, I mean, effectively what it is saying is that any form of consideration
[Guest]: of caste or community or religion into questions about employment or education is expressly
[Guest]: taboo and what's, I mean, what's basically prevented by the sort of chapter on fundamental
[Guest]: rights cannot then be enabled through the back door by the chapter on directive principles.
[Guest]: And again, what the courts delineate is a kind of bastion of, not really a bastion,
[Guest]: but a kind of bedrock of constitutional thought that fundamental rights effectively trump
[Guest]: the directive principles of state policy.
[Guest]: And this is something that the Nehru government doesn't completely agree with.
[Guest]: And it's interesting to read Nehru's responses to this because the directive principles of
[Guest]: state policy are kind of a hodgepodge of all sorts of things, including, you know, some
[Guest]: concern education, some concern backward class welfare, but equally there are others which
[Guest]: can concern animal husbandry and protection of cows.
[Guest]: And if that, again, as something that we discussed earlier on, if, for example, someone was to
[Guest]: take Nehru's position with respect to the article in the directive principles with regard
[Guest]: to protection of cows, what could then, you know, what it could lead to something, sort
[Guest]: of consequences that we would today be, you know, be right to question.
[Guest]: So again, anyway, this, this judgment comes in, it really shocks the Madras government
[Guest]: because the Madras government is, this has been an article of faith in Madras.
[Guest]: Initially, of course, the Congress had opposed it when it was the Justice Party doing it,
[Guest]: but this kind of social justice politics had acquired deep roots in Madras and the Congress
[Guest]: government had continued with those policies.
[Guest]: It was committed to reservations as an ideal.
[Guest]: There was crucially, again, the question of an election coming up.
[Guest]: The Madras Congress was right in its fears that there was a possibility that it would
[Guest]: lose.
[Guest]: And so they were quite, I mean, this is something that caused a lot of agitation within Madras.
[Guest]: Interestingly, this is a question out of like the three sort of fault lines that you mentioned.
[Guest]: This is the one that Nehru was the least invested in.
[Guest]: So even though there was plenty of pressure from Madras to completely override Article
[Guest]: 15, and also I think Article 29, which prohibited discrimination in the matter of admissions
[Guest]: to educational institutions receiving state aid, this was something that Nehru cast, was
[Guest]: something specifically that Nehru was kind of loathe to address, I would say.
[Guest]: And so it's unlike the other two in which his mind is quite firmly made up, this third
[Guest]: fault line takes a while to kind of build.
[Guest]: There's pressure from Madras, the chief minister comes to Delhi to speak to him, ministerial
[Guest]: delegations from Delhi come to speak to him.
[Guest]: The initially Nehru's advice is for them to rewrite the communal general order to be in
[Guest]: conformity with the constitution.
[Guest]: But of course eventually he comes around and I think, and the literature on this is slightly
[Guest]: hazy because it's something that is both in a way there is a kind of consensus that the
[Guest]: state should be committed to the welfare of backward classes of citizens, and in a way
[Guest]: there's no real clarity as to what it implies, because there had been no, unlike the question
[Guest]: of the schedule cast, which had been tackled in the constitution, this was still a sort
[Guest]: of work in progress.
[Guest]: Nobody really knew what it was going to entail or who was going to kind of be classified
[Guest]: as a backward class, what criteria would be used.
[Guest]: So some of the opposition that came, of course, to the amendment did note that there was no
[Guest]: clarity on this, there was no real way to tell what the consequences would be, and no
[Guest]: way to really tell whether it would be misused by the state, although many suspected that
[Guest]: it would be misused by the state.
[Guest]: So this is, I think, the kind of strand in which Nehru was less the driving force and
[Guest]: more the kind of, I think his role was more or less, he wasn't against it, but it was
[Guest]: not something that he was strongly concerned with.
[Guest]: So I think just the fact that the three things kind of came together sort of provided him
[Guest]: with an opportunity to create the constitutional architecture for something that they might
[Guest]: want to do in the future.
[Guest]: And just as a sort of last point, this is something that's not very clear in their correspondence,
[Guest]: but I would suspect that it was one of the sort of ways where how someone like Ambedkar
[Guest]: was brought to agree with the whole sort of broad contours of the amendment, because we
[Guest]: know that Ambedkar was not quite in agreement with the strand of it that targeted free speech,
[Guest]: for example.
[Guest]: And so I think it might also have been a way of sort of neutralizing dissent by bringing
[Guest]: in several elements into one package, really.
[Amit Varma]: So let me try to, you know, parse and put in simple terms what this particular judgment
[Amit Varma]: would have meant and what the court's point of view would be, and you can tell me if I'm
[Amit Varma]: summarizing it correctly, is that the court basically referred to the fundamental right
[Amit Varma]: of equality and said that, look, the state has to treat everyone equally.
[Amit Varma]: That means the state cannot discriminate on the basis of caste and, hey, these reservations
[Amit Varma]: are in this discrimination on the basis of caste.
[Amit Varma]: Now you might justify it in this instance saying this is my lofty goal and the, you
[Amit Varma]: know, this is how this will let me get there.
[Amit Varma]: And that is an entirely separate argument.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, today, of course, reservations are conflated with caring about caste.
[Amit Varma]: So you, you know, it's deeply politically incorrect to make an argument that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are better ways to get rid of caste and reservations might actually be a top down
[Amit Varma]: thing that make them worse or can be misused, but leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: Even if it is a tool that would work, the point that they're making is that once you
[Amit Varma]: give in to the temptation of infringing this fundamental right of equality for whatever
[Amit Varma]: reason, then what is to stop a popular government in the future from also infringing it for
[Amit Varma]: some reason of their own in some other way that they deem fit.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is better that we hold it as sacrosanct and just stick to it.
[Guest]: Would that be a correct summation?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that was more or less the court's reasoning.
[Guest]: They were quite certain and they said quite clearly that if any government elected by
[Guest]: a majority of the voters were allowed to have, you know, put their own considerations, express
[Guest]: their own considerations through these sort of executive acts, then the entire, I mean,
[Guest]: Article 15 of the Constitution would effectively become worthless.
[Guest]: And the court, those are the court's words.
[Guest]: So that's, yeah, that's a correct summation of the position.
[Guest]: Interestingly, one of the sort of questions that comes up is how do you define social
[Guest]: and educational backwardness?
[Guest]: Are the two, you know, synonymous?
[Guest]: And how much of a consideration is cast and how much of a consideration are the questions?
[Guest]: And one of the key points of the amendment is that it leaves out any mention of economic
[Guest]: circumstances.
[Guest]: The only way, what it effectively did was the only way in which such backwardness could
[Guest]: be judged was on the basis of cost.
[Guest]: So economic considerations were expressly disallowed.
[Guest]: And so that in itself has led to the kind of, it's, that debate in itself carries on
[Guest]: now in questions or in issues about, like, for example, the idea of the creamy layer
[Guest]: that comes up every time a question about reservations reaches the courts about how
[Guest]: do you exclude people who are supposedly socially backward but economically well-to-do.
[Guest]: And many of these debates go, again, go back to this kind of, this moment in time.
[Guest]: And so, again, on the question of Article 15, when the amendment was discussed within
[Guest]: the cabinet, there's a rare sort of consensus on what should be done.
[Guest]: Because from Madras, the idea is that there should be alteration of Article 15, but also
[Guest]: Article 29, which had prevented discrimination in the matter of admissions to educational
[Guest]: institutes.
[Guest]: And they basically wanted an amendment to the effect stating that nothing in either
[Guest]: Article 15 or Article 29 too would prevent special provisions for the educational, economic
[Guest]: and social advancement of the backward classes.
[Guest]: And the cabinet, I think most were of the belief, or at least that's what was expressed,
[Guest]: that there was, you know, this could not be misused for any class discrimination that
[Guest]: was against the spirit of the Constitution.
[Guest]: There was, I think, broad-based consensus that the spirit of the Constitution implied
[Guest]: that measures were taken for social justice, measures were taken for kind of the advancement
[Guest]: of backward classes.
[Guest]: But again, if I, I'm just going to quote directly from my book, in a new twist, the cabinet
[Guest]: also recommended that all references to economic and economically be dropped and the language
[Guest]: be limited to socially and educationally backward classes.
[Guest]: Through this slate of hand, the cabinet sought to achieve two objectives.
[Guest]: First, it would remove any prospect of economic criteria coming in the way of calculating
[Guest]: the backwardness of a class based on their social and educational standing.
[Guest]: Second, it would preempt and negate any demands for special provisions or reservations for
[Guest]: those who could be termed economically backward without the corresponding status of social
[Guest]: or educational backwardness.
[Guest]: So basically, they wanted power to legislate for reservations, but equally they wanted
[Guest]: to prevent a kind of open-ended, almost race to, you know, race to the bottom.
[Guest]: Because as, again, as K. V. Kamath, you know, quite pointedly intervenes in the debate and
[Guest]: he says on the question of backwardness, well, 90% of the country is backward and there is
[Guest]: no way of, you know, really differentiating who's educationally and socially backward
[Guest]: through the use of the, you know, lens of caste and community.
[Guest]: But of course, I mean, that was not a popular position.
[Guest]: And so the exclusion of economic backwardness from the kind of ambit of India's reservation
[Guest]: policy was, is again something that can be traced back to the First Amendment.
[Guest]: And I think, again, the cabinet and many of the parliamentarians were not quite certain
[Guest]: as to how the process or the policy of reservations was going to be developed, because it was
[Guest]: something that had yet to really be, you know, finalized.
[Guest]: I think the first Backward Class Commission was appointed much after this.
[Guest]: So I think today, many of the questions that we would consider today, questions about like
[Guest]: recent before the 29 elections, of course, the government announced a kind of reservation
[Guest]: policy for economically weaker sections.
[Guest]: And of course, the question of the creamy layer within the backward classes keeps cropping
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: And again, that's a question that goes back to the First Amendment.
[Guest]: And I think that's, it's one of the most interesting sort of fault line of the three.
[Guest]: It's probably possibly the most interesting, because at the time, it also seems to be the
[Guest]: least important.
[Guest]: The least amount of attention is paid to it.
[Amit Varma]: Except in the south where Periyar railed against the judgment in rallies, and the Times of
[Amit Varma]: India, you know, wrote about quote, crusaders for a separate Dravidistan are once again
[Amit Varma]: on the march.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I imagine this would also have sort of put pressure on Nehru that you know, the center
[Amit Varma]: must hold and these political imperatives also matter along with all the factors you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned before, such as, you know, maybe keeping Ambedkar enthusiastic was part of
[Amit Varma]: the mix.
[Amit Varma]: So now that you know, all these three fault lines have come together, and you've repeatedly
[Amit Varma]: quoted Nehru at different parts of the book, basically shitting on the constitution saying
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, we need to kind of, you know, if the constitution isn't going along with us,
[Amit Varma]: and we must get a, you know, change the constitution, and you sum it up very well here.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll quickly quote this book where you write at the time of the, you know, just before
[Amit Varma]: the First Amendment is happening, you write quote, the Prime Minister was essentially
[Amit Varma]: making three claims.
[Amit Varma]: First at the failure of the Congress social agenda when confronted with the constitution
[Amit Varma]: should be regarded as an intolerable situation.
[Amit Varma]: Since he did not want to face the populace and be accused of breaching his promise, the
[Amit Varma]: constitution would have to give way to the primacy of the Congress program.
[Amit Varma]: Second that the social policy is devised by elected legislatures, sites of popular sovereignty,
[Amit Varma]: being held unconstitutional by the courts was a denial of democracy, even if the legislatures
[Amit Varma]: had been elected on a distinctly limited and narrow franchise.
[Amit Varma]: In true democratic spirit, the constitution would have to bend to accommodate the will
[Amit Varma]: of the people as represented by a legislature elected indirectly, and on a limited franchise.
[Amit Varma]: Third, the three pillars of the state, the judiciary, the executive and the legislature
[Amit Varma]: were not equal.
[Amit Varma]: The executive was to create and give effect to social policy.
[Amit Varma]: And it was to have primacy over the other wings of the state, especially the judiciary.
[Amit Varma]: It was a slippery slope, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And separately in an interview, you've spoken about how the first amendment showed the judiciary
[Unknown]: its place.
[Amit Varma]: So what is the process like now?
[Amit Varma]: So you know, he wants to, you know, his own cabinet members like Ambedkar Rajaji and whoever
[Amit Varma]: are on board with him, and Patel, you know, dies in December 1950.
[Amit Varma]: And the first amendment actually goes for, you know, all the voting happens in May 51.
[Unknown]: So what's happening?
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken about all the opposition leaders kind of gathered around in but what's the
[Amit Varma]: overall sort of what's happening in the political space?
[Amit Varma]: Like if Republic TV existed, what would they be showing?
[Amit Varma]: They would still be showing film stars taking drugs, actually.
[Amit Varma]: So cancel that question.
[Guest]: But yeah,
[Guest]: interesting that you you mentioned what the media would be showing, because if you were
[Guest]: to simply go by Nehru's utterances, the media didn't seem to be all that different back
[Guest]: in the day, even though we we know it was, but Nehru consistently rails against the media.
[Guest]: And one of the things he keeps saying, you know, is what will be the effect on our soldiers
[Guest]: and what will be the effect on our youth of reading this trash?
[Guest]: So I think he might have probably written the same thing, same thing about Republic.
[Guest]: But to go back to your question, Nehru makes this claim, the sort of three claims that
[Guest]: you mentioned, and he makes them quite, quite strongly.
[Guest]: So there is there is a letter where he basically says that the job of the government is no
[Guest]: longer simply to, you know, to make policy, it is now to basically direct social change
[Guest]: and to see it through.
[Guest]: And he's firmly committed to that line.
[Guest]: Politically, things kind of progressively reach, at least what he thinks, as a kind
[Guest]: of difficult time because he's, Zamindari abolition is something that he's very committed
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: Post Patel's death, there is no real challenger within the Congress establishment.
[Guest]: And as the sort of new year kind of opens, there's this feeling that there has to be
[Guest]: a sort of reckoning with these questions.
[Guest]: So what happens is, and again, this is to Nehru's credit, is that Nehru initially aims
[Guest]: to hold elections in the summer of 1951.
[Guest]: He's kind of stopped because of obstructionism by the states.
[Guest]: Many of the states, mainly for these reasons, are kind of not quite ready to test their
[Guest]: popularity.
[Guest]: And you can kind of see why, because, for example, in Madras, the Congress fails to
[Guest]: win a majority in the first election.
[Guest]: So there's a kind of obstructionism that happens in the states.
[Guest]: Nehru presses his chief ministers quite hard without success.
[Guest]: And so elections are eventually delayed.
[Guest]: And of course, that kind of gives them enough time to basically address these issues before
[Guest]: going in for election.
[Guest]: So basically, if I could, on the morning of 25 January 1951, the Congress Working Committee
[Guest]: meets at Congress headquarters.
[Guest]: And again, the question, as reported by the press, is they discuss the question of how
[Guest]: to galvanize the Indian National Congress so as to maintain its moral and political
[Guest]: hold over the people.
[Guest]: Over the final quarter of, over the sort of tail end of 1950, Sardar Patel had died.
[Guest]: There had been the formation of a kind of dissident unit within the Congress called
[Guest]: the Democratic Front, led by Kriplani and Rafi Ahmad Gidwai.
[Guest]: There was kind of speculation that several senior figures could quit.
[Guest]: The Nehru government itself had been, had, you know, three major ministerial resignations
[Guest]: over 1950, Mathai, Mukherjee, Niyogi.
[Guest]: And it's sort of surreal to look back now and read the kind of press reports, because
[Guest]: there are several editorials which keep questioning, being like, will the Congress survive in its
[Guest]: present form?
[Guest]: You know, what will be the future?
[Guest]: And so I think even if it seems surreal to us now to look back and think, well, you know,
[Guest]: why would people doubt the ability of the Congress to survive in 1951, there were several
[Guest]: who did.
[Guest]: And so I think this kind of backdrop is important to remember, and I think that kind of gives
[Guest]: impetus to this kind of feeling that all these questions now have to be tackled head on before
[Guest]: they go back to the people.
[Guest]: And of course, the Allahabad High Court then stops the UP.
[Guest]: It grants injunctions against the UP Zamindari Abolition Act, which it takes up for examination.
[Guest]: And that kind of builds this idea that there's almost, the government is sort of under a
[Guest]: form of judicial siege, because these are, I mean, these are quite big sort of cornerstones
[Guest]: of government policy.
[Guest]: So as things build up over the first few months of 1951, you have, in January, you have the
[Guest]: Allahabad High Court judgment, which effectively stays the operation of the UP Act.
[Guest]: You then have, in March, the judgment of the Patna High Court, which declares the Bihar
[Guest]: Act to be unconstitutional.
[Guest]: And then you also have sort of, in between, you have all of these things kind of brewing
[Guest]: in the background.
[Guest]: You have once, you know, Master Tara Singh has been released, as I pointed out in the
[Guest]: previous part of the conversation, he kind of declares his intention to bring on board,
[Guest]: invites the communists and the Hindu Mahasabha to join him on a common platform.
[Guest]: There is this sort of democratic front, which is, you know, bubbling within the Congress.
[Guest]: So there are all of these, I wouldn't really class it as political turmoil, but there's
[Guest]: all this, there's a lot of politics going on, going on in the background.
[Guest]: And I think it kind of leads to a situation where progressively the government, there
[Guest]: have been adverse judgments in, you know, on huge matters of policy, on reservations,
[Guest]: on Zamindari abolition.
[Guest]: And progressively, the impression that one gets from reading Nehru's correspondence is
[Guest]: a kind of feeling of siege, almost.
[Guest]: And there is within the Congress broad backing for a kind of collision with the constitution
[Guest]: and the judiciary.
[Guest]: And when matters finally reach a head, there is, and you notice that there is more or less
[Guest]: almost, I wouldn't say universal consensus, but there's more or less like enough support
[Guest]: within the Congress party for the amendment to be contemplated.
[Guest]: When it's done, they start drafting it as early as March, even though Nehru publicly
[Guest]: keeps denying that an amendment is coming or, you know, assures, for example, he attends
[Guest]: a meeting of the All India Newspaper Editors Conference, where he assures them that the
[Guest]: freedom of the press is something that is very dear to him.
[Guest]: And they take it to mean that he has dropped the idea of a constitutional amendment.
[Guest]: And, you know, they thank him voluminously for his generosity.
[Guest]: So there's a lot that's going on.
[Guest]: And politically, the kind of sense that I get is of a government consistently being
[Guest]: forced onto the back foot and on matters that it considered very close to, if there was
[Guest]: anything that was a kind of matter of faith within the Congress, those two things definitely
[Guest]: were it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, you were speaking with the press and the newspaper editors and it
[Amit Varma]: kind of made me smile because I'll read out a quote first by the Times of India and then
[Amit Varma]: Nehru's response, where he sounds less like Nehru and more like Donald Trump, actually.
[Amit Varma]: But the Times of India quote is, quote, and this is after they come to know of the First
[Amit Varma]: Amendment, obviously, quote, it is a tragic irony that our popular government should at
[Amit Varma]: every stage feel the need of repressive laws against which leaders of our struggle for
[Amit Varma]: freedom cried themselves hoarse for generations.
[Amit Varma]: The whirling of times brings some strange revenges, the decriers of a government once
[Amit Varma]: termed satanic, flatter our previous rulers by imitation, they resort to preventive detention
[Amit Varma]: even without declaring a state of emergency.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is written in 1951, friends, not 2020.
[Amit Varma]: And Nehru's response to this is, you know, so he speaks to the parliament about the press.
[Amit Varma]: And then, as you quote him, he's writing to his chief ministers about what he told parliament.
[Amit Varma]: So he says about that, quote, while appreciating the role of newspapers, generally, I pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that some weekly periodicals, especially at past all limits of decency, and we're carrying
[Amit Varma]: on persistently a propaganda full of falsehood and malice to remain silent may also have
[Amit Varma]: consequences.
[Amit Varma]: I have appealed to the newspaper editors to take it in hand.
[Amit Varma]: But if they fail, then something else will have to be thought of.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, which is quite a threat at the end of it, that something else will have to
[Amit Varma]: be thought of and otherwise is fulmination against sort of fake news to use modern terminology
[Amit Varma]: is reminiscent of leaders one won't often associate with him.
[Guest]: No, he does it quite often.
[Guest]: I mean, it's something that is really, really sort of eating into him.
[Guest]: Because he says it several times in parliament.
[Guest]: He says it to the when he addresses the all Indian newspapers editors conference.
[Guest]: And most interestingly, he says it to at the end, when he, you know, after the amendment
[Guest]: has been passed on 11 June, Nehru was questioned on how the amendment was going to affect the
[Guest]: press.
[Guest]: And he says, I do not think that in spite of the heat rays in the recent debates, it
[Guest]: affects the press much.
[Guest]: You will forgive me if I say we talk so much of the freedom of the press, but the more
[Guest]: and more I see that that freedom might as well be exercised by anyone who has money
[Guest]: enough to buy up a paper.
[Guest]: Actually it is rather an odd experience for me to see a newspaper within a week or 10
[Guest]: days completely change its policy tone, and everything except in regard to one matter.
[Guest]: And that was it's rather extreme dislike of the government and me, that is the freedom
[Guest]: of the press.
[Guest]: So, I mean, he's quite, it's quite easy to see that this was something that he took very,
[Guest]: very seriously, and that he was very averse to any form of criticism.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it also seems to me that, you know, he would be someone who would have felt entitled
[Amit Varma]: to the adulation and adoration of his fellow Indians after all these years in the freedom
[Amit Varma]: struggle.
[Amit Varma]: But suddenly he's actually replaced, he's in charge of the colonial apparatus, which
[Amit Varma]: was otherwise oppressing them.
[Amit Varma]: And I can imagine the sense of entitlement he feels and indeed that his descendants still
[Amit Varma]: feel that they're not in a similar position of power.
[Amit Varma]: Another strand that I found interesting in your book was about how, you know, Rajendra
[Amit Varma]: Prasad, the president at the time, spoke out against him and, you know, repeatedly asked
[Amit Varma]: him not to go ahead with the first amendment.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, Rajendra Prasad says, quote, part three of the constitution which lays
[Amit Varma]: down the fundamental rights has a special importance and significance of its own.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an irony of late that this part which stands above every other part of the constitution
[Amit Varma]: is the first to be assailed, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you also point out, and this seemed very strange and petty to me, that when, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he wrote this letter to the cabinet and Nehru said he'll read it out to the cabinet.
[Amit Varma]: But then he writes to him, quote, it would be exceedingly unfortunate if the public became
[Amit Varma]: aware that the president had a contrary position to that of the cabinet in such a matter and
[Amit Varma]: was pressing for his adoption by the cabinet, stop quote, in effect telling, you know, Prasad
[Amit Varma]: to shut up.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how was this sort of dynamic playing out?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, today, of course, the president is a figurehead, but Rajendra Prasad was a heavyweight
[Amit Varma]: leader in the Congress party and, you know, and how was all of this playing out?
[Guest]: It's very interesting because Prasad and Nehru dynamic went through its ups and downs.
[Guest]: Prasad, for starters, considered himself Nehru's equal.
[Guest]: Secondly, his own conception of the president's role was not simply, I mean, he took the idea
[Guest]: that he was to advise and guide quite seriously.
[Guest]: So he wasn't a rubber stamp sort of president.
[Guest]: And equally, Prasad was very willing to intervene in government and let his views be known.
[Guest]: But crucially, he was well aware of the sort of need to maintain constitutional rectitude
[Guest]: or, you know, set good precedents.
[Guest]: And so, for example, when Nehru writes to him and tells him it would be exceedingly
[Guest]: unfortunate if your views were to become publicly known, Prasad actually doesn't let his views
[Guest]: be publicly known.
[Guest]: I mean, he's willing to write to the prime minister, but he's not willing to kind of
[Guest]: jeopardize the whole setup by stepping outside constitutional bounds, which, to be honest,
[Guest]: he could have done if he really wanted to, but he doesn't.
[Guest]: And the same thing kind of happens when the Zamindari Abolition Act is passed.
[Guest]: The president has to certify the Zamindari Abolition Act because it obviously contravenes
[Guest]: a part of the constitution, and it can be saved, or at least it's assumed to be saved
[Guest]: by a presidential notification or presidential approval.
[Guest]: And when he gets the Bihar law, Rajendra Prasad obviously recognizes the flaws in it.
[Guest]: And he kind of tarries by asking for legal opinion, and he sits on it.
[Guest]: And you know, Nehru writes to him again, when I quote, and he says, and effectively tells
[Guest]: him that the cabinet have agreed to it, and threatens to resign if the president doesn't
[Guest]: certify the act.
[Guest]: And of course, Prasad then promptly does certify it, even though he doesn't really quite agree
[Guest]: with Nehru or recognize what the need for this sort of daring hurry is.
[Guest]: So it's interesting to note that Prasad takes his role seriously, but is also effectively
[Guest]: very committed to the constitutional order.
[Guest]: At no point does he seek to kind of overturn it or to even intervene in a way that could
[Guest]: be seen to be deliberately intervening in areas of government that he really should
[Guest]: not be intervening in.
[Guest]: So that is a very, very interesting dynamic.
[Guest]: Especially when Nehru often thinks that Rajendra Prasad has a propensity to exceed his brief,
[Guest]: because his reading of the situation is that the president is duty bound to follow the
[Guest]: advice of his council of ministers.
[Guest]: And things kind of come to a head when the amendment reaches Rajendra Prasad, because
[Guest]: he obviously doesn't sign it immediately.
[Guest]: He seeks legal opinion, because he thinks the amendment itself might well be unconstitutional,
[Guest]: because the method used to pass it, coincidentally, eerily similar to what was used recently in
[Guest]: the case of Article 370.
[Guest]: So Prasad suspects that the amendment itself may be unconstitutional, and he asks for advice
[Guest]: from Alladi Krishnaswami Iyer, whose advice we don't have on record.
[Guest]: But obviously, Prasad signs it in the end.
[Guest]: So I think the legal advice he received probably indicated that that's what he should do.
[Guest]: So it's, it's a very interesting dynamic, but Prasad doesn't shy away from letting his
[Guest]: views be known.
[Guest]: And in most cases, those views are quite the opposite of what the government has.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's quite remarkable, because if in the current day, you know, your president
[Amit Varma]: receives a letter like that, it's like leaked in 30 seconds, and on times now and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So and your book also has this unlikely sort of liberal hero now you'd expect, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for many people seem to think of Nehru as a liberal hero for some reason, but Nehru is
[Amit Varma]: a person who says, Oh, these fundamental rights are a 19th century artifact, we are not in
[Amit Varma]: the French Revolution, and, you know, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But the person who is really defending them and defending them with great eloquence and
[Amit Varma]: passion is Shama Prasad Mukherjee, where he talks about how the First Amendment cuts court
[Amit Varma]: at the very root of the fundamental principles of the Constitution, he calls it quote, the
[Amit Varma]: beginning of the encroachment of the liberty of the people of free India, stop quote, and
[Amit Varma]: then addressing Nehru during the heated debates, he says, quote, by this amendment, you are
[Amit Varma]: saying that whatever legislation is passed, it is deemed to be law, then why have your
[Amit Varma]: Constitution?
[Amit Varma]: Why have your fundamental rights?
[Amit Varma]: Who asked you to have fundamental rights at all, you are treating the Constitution as
[Amit Varma]: a scrap of paper, stop quote, and at one point, Nehru got irritated and apparently wanted
[Amit Varma]: to charge him with sedition and only Patel stopped him from doing that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, what is our sense of Mukherjee because there isn't much written about him
[Amit Varma]: to my knowledge, there isn't a great biography, he didn't really leave much writing behind.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you read him in the constitutional debates with Nehru and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems like, you know, one of the tallest, most principled leaders.
[Guest]: So what's your sense of all of that?
[Guest]: He was he was actually a remarkably principled man.
[Guest]: And he that's borne out by, for example, his resignation from the Nehru cabinet.
[Guest]: It's also borne out, quite importantly, by his resignation from the Hindu Mahasabha,
[Guest]: because what people don't realize is that he quit the Hindu Mahasabha, because he felt
[Guest]: that once we have a secular state, there was no need or no space for a quote unquote, Hindu
[Guest]: party anymore.
[Guest]: So he's that way, he's a very, very interesting and complex figure to look at.
[Guest]: But and one of the things that comes across in these debates with Nehru is that unlike
[Guest]: Nehru, whose debates are very impassioned, but also often short on facts and logic, Mukherjee
[Guest]: is a very incisive speaker.
[Guest]: And it's again, this is borne out when they speak, because most of the time when the debate
[Guest]: happens, obviously Nehru presents his case, and then Mukherjee replies as the leader of
[Guest]: the opposition.
[Guest]: So the first time the bill is kind of debated in Parliament, Mukherjee replies and immediately
[Guest]: after Mukherjee replies, the person to speak is NG Ranga, Congress stalwart, later one
[Guest]: of the founders of the Swatantra Party, and he compares Mukherjee to Edmund Burke, and
[Guest]: calls it one of the greatest speeches that he's ever heard in Indian Parliament.
[Guest]: So it's interesting to note, the kind of impression that you get of Mukherjee is very unlike what
[Guest]: is often believed, because you hear of him in the context of Kashmir, in the context
[Guest]: of 370, but you often don't hear of him in the context of freedom of speech, for example.
[Guest]: And Mukherjee is one of the most dogged defenders of that freedom, and in many ways very, very
[Guest]: patient, because he keeps, one of the reasons that he criticises Nehru again, is because
[Guest]: he's well aware that what Nehru is doing is laying a precedent for something far worse
[Guest]: in the future, or in some ways providing legal and constitutional tools that are prone to
[Guest]: misuse by anyone who is willing to transcend his scruples, or his commitment to constitutionalism.
[Guest]: And Mukherjee almost leads the kind of charge against the bill, and I think he makes a very,
[Guest]: very successful case for himself, and for the opposition.
[Guest]: It's reported widely in the press, it's, again, commentators often note that, you know, whatever
[Guest]: of the, I think the line that I remember offhand is the Times of India describing the debate
[Guest]: between Nehru and Mukherjee and noting that the Prime Minister's passion was more than
[Guest]: outmatched by the incisive logic of Mukherjee's arguments, and I think that it's, that's quite
[Guest]: apparent that he sort of read between the lines of what was happening far more clearly
[Guest]: than many of the others did, and he was willing to stake out a principled position, despite
[Guest]: the fact that it had, you know, caused him to leave the Nehru cabinet, almost kind of
[Guest]: enter the political wilderness, and in many ways, take out a position that many of his
[Guest]: own ideological fellow travelers are perhaps not the most comfortable with.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it would seem that, you know, Mukherjee was, of course, borne out by history, not
[Amit Varma]: the history of the last few decades, but just the history of the next few years, in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that it wasn't just about those specific amendments or those specific policies, which
[Amit Varma]: Nehru wanted to get through, but about the desecration of the constitution and of constitutionalism
[Amit Varma]: itself, you know, which had led Justice, Chief Justice Hidayatullah to once quip that ours
[Amit Varma]: was the only constitution which needed protection against itself.
[Amit Varma]: And the father of our constitution, B. R. Ambedkar, in fact, in 1954, I think after
[Amit Varma]: the Fourth Amendment, when he was no longer in government, said, quote, we built a temple
[Amit Varma]: for a god to come in and recite, but before the god could be installed, if the devil has
[Amit Varma]: taken possession of it, what else could we do except destroy the temple?
[Amit Varma]: We did not intend that it should be occupied by the Asuras, we intended it to be occupied
[Amit Varma]: by the Devas.
[Amit Varma]: That is the reason I said, I would rather like to burn it, stop quote, which are strong
[Amit Varma]: words from someone who actually, you know, was a driving force behind our constitution.
[Amit Varma]: Let's so you know, eventually it gets passed and it's a done deal.
[Amit Varma]: You've, you know, sort of, I want to ask you about the aftermath, but before that, I'll
[Amit Varma]: quickly quote you from your book where you've written this very eloquent passage, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the relationship between the state and the citizen was altered for all time.
[Amit Varma]: The precedent was set for easy, almost casual amending of the constitution and the passing
[Amit Varma]: of retrospective legislation, a mechanism for bypassing judicial review was created.
[Amit Varma]: Sedition had been retrospectively validated, a host of public safety and press control
[Amit Varma]: laws had been made operational again.
[Amit Varma]: Free speech was curtailed, no longer would it be necessary for the security of the state
[Amit Varma]: to be seriously undermined for it to prescribe free expression.
[Amit Varma]: It merely had to be in his interest to do so.
[Amit Varma]: The subservience of the constitution to government policy was demonstrated.
[Amit Varma]: The constitutional groundwork was laid for a host of repressive legislation to follow.
[Amit Varma]: A vital cardinal change had occurred, which would have immense long-term consequences
[Amit Varma]: for India, its people, and its politics, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, you know, despite people paying so much lip service, I mean, people
[Amit Varma]: pay so much lip service to the constitution, even, you know, prime minister Modi once said
[Amit Varma]: that it's his holy book and, and you know, for all practical purposes, the constitution
[Amit Varma]: is like what Mukherjee said, Nehru was turning it into a scrap of paper where any government,
[Amit Varma]: if it has the numbers can just change it and it's nowhere near as liberal as many people
[Amit Varma]: seem to think it is.
[Amit Varma]: And this is becoming, you know, more and more explicit by the day if it wasn't already before.
[Amit Varma]: What do you think are sort of the consequences for this?
[Amit Varma]: Does the constitution no longer matter or, you know, different question entirely perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: do those principles no longer matter?
[Amit Varma]: Was the experiment doomed to failure from the start?
[Guest]: I'm not sure whether I would say the experiment was doomed to failure from the start.
[Guest]: I think it was, it was quite a brave leap of faith and everyone involved acknowledged
[Guest]: it as, as a leap of faith.
[Guest]: But I think, again, I'll quote you.
[Guest]: It's a quote that I took from Sunil Killani again, where he says, basically, in a setting
[Guest]: such as India, individuality as a way of social being was a precarious undertaking.
[Guest]: And then he describes Indian liberalism to be crippled from its origins, stamped by utilitarianism
[Guest]: and squeezed into a culture that had little room for the individual.
[Guest]: So we, I mean, everyone knew that it was a kind of challenging project to begin with.
[Guest]: It was never going to be easy, it was never going to be, how should I put it, clean in
[Guest]: a way.
[Guest]: It was always going to be a messy process.
[Guest]: But I wouldn't say it was kind of doomed to failure.
[Guest]: If anything, the kind of first, the story of the First Amendment proves that actually
[Guest]: there were many who were willing to, you know, take it at face value to judiciary certainly
[Guest]: was.
[Guest]: They were willing to uphold constitutional freedoms and kind of read them quite expansively.
[Guest]: There was certainly quite important figures within the political setup who seemed to be
[Guest]: at least to be votaries of constitutional freedoms.
[Guest]: There was a press that was quite vigorous in its sort of position and defense of the
[Guest]: right to free speech.
[Guest]: Governments such as the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, who I mean
[Guest]: today we would term as probably completely obsequious, was, for example, willing to stand
[Guest]: up and, you know, and be counted in a matter of, you know, such political importance.
[Guest]: So I don't think I would say it was doomed to failure.
[Guest]: I mean, if anything, that kind of year proved that there was, that it could actually have
[Guest]: been quite a successful experiment if it hadn't really been betrayed in its sort of essentials
[Guest]: by the people who kind of midwife the experiment to begin with.
[Guest]: I mean, we can't deny that these are the people who also wrote up the Constitution.
[Guest]: So it was, I mean, it was their experiment and they failed it more than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think sort of institutions also shape society in a deeper way?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, there's this common lament that, oh, look, you know, at the time
[Amit Varma]: of our independence, at the time of our freedom struggle, we had such tall leaders and we
[Amit Varma]: have such not tall leaders now, so to say, and I've written a column again using incentives
[Amit Varma]: to sort of talk about this while pointing out that all the freedom fighters who came
[Amit Varma]: to the fore and who were tall leaders at the time of our independence had entered the freedom
[Amit Varma]: struggle and become leaders, not because they had power at the end of it or money at the
[Amit Varma]: end of it.
[Amit Varma]: They did it just to stand up for principles.
[Amit Varma]: There was no reward.
[Amit Varma]: So politics attracted that kind of a person.
[Amit Varma]: But when you have, later on, when you have a sort of a structure where there's a state
[Amit Varma]: is an overarching my barb and has so much power and essentially the similar oppressive
[Amit Varma]: role to what the colonial state had, then it will draw the kind of leaders who are attracted
[Amit Varma]: to power for power's sake and power to whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore those tall principle leaders will no longer emerge.
[Amit Varma]: And it would seem to me that the degrading of the constitution in a sense would also
[Amit Varma]: have been a further disincentive for people of principle to actually enter the fray.
[Guest]: Do you think there's something to that?
[Guest]: I mean, I think it's yes, yes and no.
[Guest]: So yes, sort of institutions and, you know, precedence and the law itself and the constitution
[Guest]: itself do shape society in certain ways.
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to deny or even overstate the kind of normative power that they wield.
[Guest]: Even today, for example, protesters who hold copies of the constitution aloft, kind of
[Guest]: what they try to do is they're trying to channel the normative power of the constitution rather
[Guest]: than, you know, actually looking at the nitty gritties of what the constitution says.
[Guest]: I'm quite shocked if they were to actually see what the constitution says.
[Guest]: But it's one of the reasons that the constitution was written in the way that it was, was that
[Guest]: a lot of figures, Ambedkar especially, had little faith in the ability of Indian society
[Guest]: to reform itself or for there to be a sense of corrective impulse originating from within
[Guest]: society.
[Guest]: And because they didn't have that faith in the self-correcting ability of society almost
[Guest]: or the possibility of any idea of social reform really originating from within society or
[Guest]: taking hold organically within society, they almost had an over-dependence on using legal
[Guest]: forms to drive what they saw as social or political change.
[Guest]: And ultimately, I mean, recently Pratap Bhanu Mehta, for example, wrote a column where he
[Guest]: very generously quoted from my book, but again, the sort of crux of the column was that there's
[Guest]: only so much that can be accomplished by the use of legal and constitutional tools, I mean,
[Guest]: if fundamentally social questions can only partially be addressed in terms of legality.
[Guest]: And I think that's one point where figures like Nehru and Ambedkar were perhaps over-enthusiastic
[Guest]: about how much the law could achieve.
[Guest]: And secondly, I think they were perhaps quite cavalier in thinking about the effects that
[Guest]: would be generated by these sort of institutional mechanisms, because Nehru, for example, seemed
[Guest]: almost unaware, I mean, and it's hard to judge whether he was deliberately ignorant or genuinely
[Guest]: unaware of the kind of incentives that would be generated or the kind of consequences that
[Guest]: would be generated through the First Amendment.
[Guest]: It's hard to tell.
[Guest]: You could, I mean, at best he was naive, at worst he was, you know, malevolent.
[Guest]: And so I think both these strands kind of intersected at this point.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of leaving history aside now and leaving your book aside and coming to the present
[Amit Varma]: moment and coming to the personal, I'm curious about how your book has been received.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, as we discussed at the start of the show, we are in times where history
[Amit Varma]: has been weaponized, where Nehru is looked upon as on one side as exclusively the ideal
[Amit Varma]: liberal who could do no wrong and on the other side as this demon who is responsible for
[Amit Varma]: everything that has gone wrong with India.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, like any person, and as your book acknowledges, you know, all figures in
[Amit Varma]: history contain multitude.
[Amit Varma]: So all of it is true, and all of it is false and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I would imagine that nevertheless, in your book, it would seem as if it's ideal
[Amit Varma]: fodder for those who want to blame Nehru for where India is today.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something you were wary of?
[Amit Varma]: And has that impacted the way your book has been read, where people are not actually reading
[Amit Varma]: the book for the nuance and the history, but they are just sort of weaponizing it?
[Guest]: Has that happened?
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: I mean, I think history is always complex.
[Guest]: And it's always, I don't think the job of a historian is to be kind, really, to anyone.
[Guest]: It's to be as kind of as incisive as possible and shine the spotlight as bright as you can.
[Guest]: And that's something that I've tried to do.
[Guest]: I think, I'm sure there are people who've read it, because it can provide sort of intellectual
[Guest]: fodder for an attack on Nehru and Nehruvinism.
[Guest]: And I'm sure there are some people who've read it or have perhaps used it like that.
[Guest]: But most reviews have generally been quite complimentary.
[Guest]: We've most of, yeah, the book doesn't set out to target Nehru.
[Guest]: It's just that the things unfold in the way they do.
[Guest]: And the episode is not particularly complimentary to Nehru.
[Guest]: But equally, I think it's very revealing in the way that it kind of looks at Nehru as
[Guest]: well, because Nehru had many aspects to his personality.
[Guest]: And the fact that he was impatient, kind of authoritarian, imperious in many ways.
[Guest]: I mean, those aspects of his personality are as important as anything else, as his sort
[Guest]: of commitment, often kind of pedantic and tendentious, as it were, his commitment to
[Guest]: democracy, to the idea of collective decision making, etc.
[Guest]: And so to have a more complete or rounded picture, you need both sides.
[Guest]: And I think in that way, this story is very, very revealing.
[Guest]: But some perhaps might have used the book in that way.
[Guest]: But I think most people have taken it in the right spirit.
[Guest]: I haven't really seen, all of the reviews have been quite sort of complimentary and
[Guest]: not quite, nobody has really kind of seen the book as a sort of weapon against Nehru.
[Guest]: I mean, it is what it is.
[Guest]: Just one more point, if I make it, is that I'm sure there are plenty of people who would
[Guest]: have disliked it or not read it or not engaged with it, equally, because they see Nehru as
[Guest]: this kind of, you know, grand liberal figure who I've kind of set out to defame.
[Guest]: And so neither of those things are true.
[Guest]: I mean, history is neither kind nor generous, it just is.
[Amit Varma]: It is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And I found your book was, you know, very fair to all the characters.
[Amit Varma]: And what I found especially revealing about your book is not so much necessarily the people
[Amit Varma]: and the events involved, but also how it shows through them, that intersection of human nature
[Amit Varma]: and the structure of our politics, and how, you know, people in positions of power are
[Amit Varma]: corrupted by that power and are, you know, responding to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great time reading your book, and I recommend to all my listeners that they
[Amit Varma]: go out and buy it.
[Amit Varma]: Tripod Dhaman, I've taken a lot of your time today.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for sharing your insights.
[Guest]: No, the pleasure was all mine.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for inviting me.
[Guest]: And it's been a great honor to be able to have this conversation with you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy Tripod Dhaman's excellent book, 16 Stormy Days.
[Amit Varma]: It's a must read.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow Tripod Dhaman on Twitter at Tripod Dhaman, T-R-I-P-U-R-D-A-M-A-N.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and please behave in a constitutional way, whatever that means.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Unknown]: Thank you.